---
affiliation:
- id: 0
  organization: Universidad Iberoamericana Ciudad de México
article:
  elocation-id: reuse-rewrite-disappropriate
author:
- Gabriela Méndez Cota
- Carolina Cuevas
- Yareni Monteon
- Sandra Hernández
- Sandra Loyola
- Fernanda Rodriguez
- Deni Garciamoreno Becerril
- Etelvina Bernal
- Xóchitl Arteaga Villamil
- Nidia Rosales
bibliography: /tmp/tmp-60xgYsQj2CYEBt.json
copyright:
  link: "https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/"
  text: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
    License
  type: CC-BY-SA
date:
  day: 28
  month: 04
  year: 2023
journal:
  publisher-name: Open Humanities Press
  title: Ecological Rewriting
link-citations: true
title: Reuse, rewrite, disappropriate
uri: "https://ecologicalrewritings.pubpub.org/pub/reuse-rewrite-disappropriate"
---

# Preface

by Gabriela Méndez Cota

From Mexico, where we live and work, we entrust you with a series of
fragments, thoughts and stories hovering in the grey region between the
singular, the academic, and the more-than-human aspects of reading and
writing. Mediated by the teletechnological artifactuality of the COVID
pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the fragments echo what
Michael Marder and Anaïs Tondeur, inspired by Svetlana Alexievich's
*Voices of Chernobyl*, have in *The Chernobyl Herbarium* called an
'exploded consciousness'. As committed readers of these two works*,* we
set out to *reuse*, *rewrite* and *disappropriate* the second of them on
the basis of a shared general question: what of the event named
'Chernobyl' remains to be witnessed in the material and imaginary space
that we call 'Mexico'? Both too much and too little, we thought. Too
much, because the event of Chernobyl barely registered in the Mexican
public sphere and still appears, in common sense, as unrelated to more
familiar injuries of colonialism, authoritarianism, neoliberalism and
narco-state violence. Too little, because the significance of Chernobyl
is, indeed, in some sense unrelated to human subjectivity. It is perhaps
Chernobyl's very indifference to the fact that most people in Mexico, as
elsewhere, live their lives without remembering that they, like all
forms of human or non-human life, were exposed to radiation, that struck
us the most while reading *The Chernobyl Herbarium*. If a fundamental
rethinking of the meaning of 'Chernobyl' has yet to take place against
the dual backdrop of nuclear disaster and climate chaos -- both driven,
at least in part, by human hubris -- our wager in this small book has
been to bear witness, in a way informed by deconstructive and
psychoanalytic trajectories of thinking, to a failure of representation
that has always been there, unsettling the frames and scales of both
academic and testimonial writing.

COPIM's call to reuse open access materials experimentally on the basis
of a commitment to creativity, critique and justice, detonated a
reflection about what 'reuse' would mean to those of us who usually
think about our activities as professional knowledge production, and who
live with an expectation to write specifically from what is called the
'Global South'. Since COPIM did not establish in advance what
'knowledge' would mean in the context of this experiment, we initially
set out to reuse and rewrite *The Chernobyl Herbarium* as a 'situated'
response to that work's treatment of existential questions. We soon
realized, however, that given the project's emphasis on the material and
performative aspects of digitally mediated reading and writing, our task
involved decisions that went beyond developing a 'Mexican' analysis of
Chernobyl. Moreover, while the majority of us had a background in
continental philosophy, we were already interested in exploring the
channels of communication between disciplinary discourses and wider
cultural practices in the context of an experimental research project
entitled '[Philosophy of Editorial Practice: Critical Perspectives on
Open Access](https://filosofiadelapracticaeditorial.net/ "null")'
(Universidad Iberoamericana Ciudad de México, 2019-2021). This meant
that we had to perform our rewriting of *The Chernobyl Herbarium*,* *not
just in terms of reusing its self-contained content or its aesthetic
form, but in terms of making a critical intervention in the academic
institution, too. Yet rather than being pre-planned as a critical
programme, our articulation of a *situated* reuse and rewriting of *The
Chernobyl Herbarium* materialized gradually through the collaborative
process of becoming experimental writers or 'rewriters'. At the same
time, while we may have decided not to apply any pre-given method or
strategy of artistic disruption or critical appropriation to a work we
had chosen because it invited us to attune affectively with the
fundamental fragility of existence, we nevertheless tried to reuse and
rewrite it in a way that conveyed our respect and appreciation for the
work of the others involved.

In *Los muertos indóciles. Necroescrituras y desapropiación*, the
Mexican author and historian Cristina Rivera Garza points out that, like
the practice of community, rewriting is about working with time to
render something unfinished. If writing is 'the basis of all practice of
community', one must conclude that community is always in/with time,
always unfinished, always yet to be done [@rivera_garza_muertos_2019].
Furthermore, the practice of community would be non-appropriative or,
rather, 'disappropiating', an idea that can also be traced to Jean-Luc
Nancy's notion of 'literary communism'. Nancy refers to writing as 'the
act that interrupts, with a single stroke -- by an incision and/or an
inscription -- the shaping of the scene of myth' [@nancy_literary_1991].
The myth, in this case, is not merely that of individual genius or
romantic authorship. It is the myth of identity as such, whether it
takes a liberal or communitarian (or other) form. Beyond myth, something
like 'community' would take place, but precisely 'not in a work that
would bring it to completion, even less in itself as work (family,
people, church, nation, party, literature, philosophy), but in the
unworking and as the unworking of all its works' [@nancy_literary_1991].
What Rivera Garza and Nancy suggested to us, then, was that the reuse of
open access materials did not need to be thought as appropriation or
reappropriation of 'knowledge'. Instead, it could be thought as a
creative exercise in 'unworking' or 'disappropriating' which could
creatively resonate-with (rather than conventionally represent) *The
Chernobyl Herbarium's* invitation to think through (vegetal) exposure
and fragility.

It took us over a year, from mid-2020 until the end of 2021, to invent
ourselves as a rewriting 'community'. The process of doing so had
several stages, from a reading group and a collective annotation of *The
Chernobyl Herbarium* on hypothes.is, through discussing ways of
generating new content by means of associations and intertextuality, to
drafting and commenting on individually authored pieces that allowed
each rewriter to elaborate a singular engagement with Marder and
Tondeur's book. Each of the rewriters interpreted and elaborated the
classic feminist notion of 'situated knowledges' in a singular way,
without any clear and stable guidelines concerning knowledge, evaluation
criteria or academic goals. We focused instead on reflecting how our
spontaneous desire to collaborate or perform as a *collective* of
creative rewriters could be reflected at the formal level, given both
our interest in the practical, creative critique of institutions
[@adema_living_2021] and our basic-level prior engagement with the
technical dimensions of design and publishing processes and platforms.
In sum, we decided that we would not be appropriating a book but would
be letting our schooled selves be re-written, rendered unfinished in
creative fragmentation and montage, as a way of reusing the
*Herbarium's* invitation to think. The drafts offered by each rewriter
were in the end fragmented, edited and re-edited as the best way of
translating a series of individually authored chapters -- which read, in
Spanish, as more or less academic essays 'about' *The Chernobyl
Herbarium* -- into a dynamic set of fragments that attempt to *repeat*,
in the Kierkegaardian sense of remembering forward, the latter's style
of assembling personal memories and meditations. While the technical
point of fragmentation would be to facilitate mixture and non-linear
reading possibilities on a processual publishing platform to be chosen
and tested in the context of the COPIM project, the more conceptual or
creative aspect of fragmentation referred to the poetic complexity of
the assemblage process and the wider possibilities it allowed us to
think, in practice, collectivity or community itself. Crucially, the
fragmentation would not be reduced, for us, to a technical or merely
aesthetic exercise. Rather it would make itself count as a collective
effort to creatively disappropriate our own habits of writing and
thinking as early career researchers.

As Rivera Garza observes about the literary system, the problem with
appropriative rewriting strategies such as sampling, re-mixing and
plagiarising, is that they do not necessarily undermine conventional
notions of liberal humanist authorship; more often they strengthen their
hegemony. If at first the system reacts to them, over time it
accommodates such appropriative strategies within the terms of the
traditional conception of the individual author as genius: the Sampler,
the Re-mixer, the Plagiarist as a gifted Artist. Instead of
appropriating, or turning the alien into the proper, Rivera Garza
invites us to 'dis-appropriate', to let the alien be. A poetics of
disappropriation would seek to go beyond merely exhibiting the
relational, time-based nature of writing as reading, and of reading as
rewriting, however. It would also endeavour 'to question the domain that
makes a series of communal jobs appear as individual'
[@rivera_garza_muertos_2019]. Such is the academic domain as we know it,
in which conventions and styles of writing often require the erasure of
subjectivity, singularity and multiplicity, in favour of a clear line of
argument expressed through a detached voice whose analytical style is
orientated to an establishment of authority
[@canagarajah_geopolitics_2002].

In certain contexts, academic conventions and impersonal writing styles
can perform a critical function -- with respect to the liberal humanist
register of sentimental autobiography, for instance. In other contexts,
though, a cultivation of testimonial writing can act critically as a
form of resistance to 'schooling the world out of existence'
[@illich_deschooling_1972] by means of abstract voices that compete for
individual authority in a given disciplinary hierarchy. Aware of the
gendered history of such abstract voices, we focused on rethinking --
and therefore rewriting -- our own education, material contexts, life
experiences and political concerns, while simultaneously trying to
attune to the memory of the unthinkable that Chernobyl has come to stand
for. As a practical reference point we took inspiration from [an
earlier, non-academic eco-artistic project around Mexican
](https://enbuscadelqueliteperdido.net/ "null")[*quelites*](https://enbuscadelqueliteperdido.net/ "null")[
or edible weeds](https://enbuscadelqueliteperdido.net/ "null")
(2016-2016), which was itself inspired by the Open Humanities Press
series *Living Books About Life *(2011), and which is described in one
of the fragments that follow. As a theoretical reference point, our work
echoed the tradition of blurring the boundaries between testimonial and
philosophical writing as it took shape in the long aftermath of Latin
American debates over the politics *and* infrapolitics (or
deconstruction) of *testimonio* [@nardxgnago4]. A thinking of existence
beyond political demand that unfolds in the medium of deconstructive
testimonial writing or 'autography', the infrapolitical turn became a
key referent for the kind of exploration that rewriting came to involve
for us. Once again: if a fundamental rethinking of the meaning of
'Chernobyl' has yet to take place against the dual backdrop of nuclear
disaster and climate chaos -- both driven, at least in part, by humanism
-- our wager in this small book has been to bear witness, in a
necessarily singular way that nevertheless invokes specific
philosophical and literary legacies, to a failure of representation that
has always been there, unsettling the frames and scales of both academic
and testimonial writing.

# **Train Station** 

by Yareni Monteón

*I walk along the train tracks. *I do not know in advance how many
kilometers tucked into the jungle are those material signs of the
19th-century Porfirian progress that waits to explode again like a
nuclear bomb. Half of my heart vibrates with hope while the other half
already presages the failure of our mission. Milo and I are with Eli and
Beto in Hopelchén, Campeche, in Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. We are part
of the caravan that accompanies Marichuy, the spokesperson for the
National Indigenous Council, to the territories fighting for their
autonomy. We are gathering the signatures of voters so that those among
'us' who never had it, finally have a voice that represents them in the
public space. For those already in power have announced that if their
political party wins, there will be no future for the jungle. They will
rehabilitate the tracks to re-run a tourist train that will supposedly
detonate the region's economy. Such a fantasy of a new economic miracle
is dubbed *El Tren Maya* (The Mayan Train). Thinking of an event that
has not stopped happening for five hundred years but has gone unnoticed
after a such a long while, Milo renames it *El Tren Maña* (The Vicius
Train).* Between the metal and the wood grow all kinds of plants whose
names I do not know. I step on them like the despicable human being that
I am but they don't die; they resist. In the summer, people try to clear
the land, but after a few weeks with the help of Chaac the trees and
weeds rise again from the ashes. Life is not true or false, it simply is
and the jungle always shows it to me.*

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/xcajejrw/41668193439566.jpg){#n727tum2c08}

# **Junkyard I**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

It was January 1984. The National Nuclear Safety and Safeguards
Commission* *found an abandoned van in the border city of Ciudad Juárez,
Mexico, which emitted high levels of radiation. The vehicle in question
had been used as transport to sell, as scrap metal, what had once been a
radiotherapy unit purchased by the Specialist Medical Centre. Since
there had been no trained personnel to operate it, the unit had been
left to rot. Recovered only to be abandoned again (this time at the
Phoenix junkyard), the medical unit, disassembled into different pieces,
had mixed the cobalt-60 granules that one of its now perforated
cylinders contained with the rest of the metals that, day after day,
trucks, cranes and other machinery would be responsible for discarding,
removing and collecting. The now radioactive scrap metals would become
rebar and construction material, exported and transported by other
vehicles to the United States and the interior of Mexico to build the
foundations of numerous houses and buildings ([@n3ni2fg5fea]). For a
long time and without warning, radioactive energy would spread silently
through Mexican and American territory, even more silently as would
happen in the following years on the other side of the Atlantic after
the Chernobyl accident, [from where radiation would again spread to the
most unsuspected corners of the
world](https://culturacolectiva.com/history/mexico-radioactive-milk-chernobyl/ "null").

# **San Juanico **

by Deni Garciamoreno Becerril

Laura and I had the following exchange several months after she first
heard about the nuclear incident in Ciudad Juárez, México. The pandemic
went on and we both tried to remain confident of the interiority of our
homes versus the exteriority of the virus. Her immediate and spontaneous
answers to my story and my questions resulted in various notes which I
now regard as important topological coordinates of an invisible symptom.
*My dad died of cancer in 2000 and something must have triggered his
illness before that. There is no way of knowing if it is directly linked
to Ciudad Juárez but his house was built in those years. Cancer is a
disease that does not appear all of a sudden. It progresses silently. I
have also thought about other possibilities. For example, I seem to
remember that in 1994 he was in Chiapas with Subcomandante Marcos. Over
there, many people contracted *Helicobacter pylori*. A
gastroenterologist said to me that it was common for people who had that
bacterium to end up with cancer. My father had a test done and it came
back positive. Although this sounds very far-fetched, I have also
thought that contagion could have been on purpose, to infect the people
who went to Chiapas. But he might have just as well gotten sick from
chronic stress. He was an activist with the teachers and was involved in
many confrontations with political groups. If they tell you 'he had a
heart attack because his body was unbalanced by stress' you say 'yes,
well yes' ... . Imagine a testing of the radioactivity of the houses
that were built with those rods. That would give you some certainty, but
we don't even know where those rods went. What we need to know is the
whole story, which nobody followed up. People in power have to hide it
because they can't look bad; they do everything before they lose
control. Even if it's loss of life, loss of any kind, they do everything
to stay in power. If they are subordinates, then they do it so that
those at the top don't lose their jobs. And that happens all over the
world. ... There have already been accidents in previous years ... can
you imagine what could happen with nuclear energy? *[San
Juanico](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Juanico_disaster "null")*,
that's the place where it happened also in 1984. Just thinking that
fast, we all know the danger of not disposing of alkaline batteries
properly, so what? Most people still throw them in the trash can. After
you told me about Ciudad Juárez, I remembered that there was a nuclear
power plant in Veracruz, but I didn\'t know it was still operating, I
only remembered its name: *[*Laguna
Verde*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laguna_Verde_Nuclear_Power_Station "null")*.*

# **Chernoverde**

by Carolina Cuevas

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/vhhmv6dd/51637708326544.jpg){#n76u7lxdhem}

In the photograph, we can see a woman in a shawl. She faces the camera
and holds a banner under one of the columns of the municipal palace in
Xalapa, Veracruz. *Long live life, long live love, we don't want to live
in fear. No to Laguna Verde!* In 1968, Mexican President Díaz Ordaz
signed the authorisation to construct the Laguna Verde nuclear power
plant. The construction began in 1976 in the municipality of Alto
Lucero, Veracruz, after a territorial reorganisation that included
expropriation threats and the acquisition of land from the inhabitants
of the region by the Federal Electricity Commission
[@alejandra_oro_2014]. It was until the mid-1980s, however, that an
organised anti-nuclear movement was formed in opposition to nuclear
energy in Mexico. Between 1986 and 1988, there were blockades on the
coastal highways of Veracruz, symbolic closures of the nuclear plant, a
pilgrimage to the Basilica of Guadalupe, festivals, sit-ins, collection
of signatures, concerted blackouts and ringing of bells, written
interventions on electricity bills, and red ribbons on the doors of
houses. The protests aimed to prevent the reactor from being loaded at
Laguna Verde. To prevent the monster in the lagoon from waking up:
*There are Three Miles from Chernobyl to Laguna Verde*; *We don\'t want
another San Juanico Verde; We don\'t want another Chernoverde*; *Better
active today than radioactive tomorrow*; *Yes to life, no to death*
[@paya_laguna_2018]. The woman in the photograph is part of the
incipient anti-nuclear movement in Mexico. A few metres away, a man
walks under the city's well known incessant ***chipichipi*****.**

# **Thinking-feeling**

by Xóchitl Arteaga Villamil

*Sentipensar* (thinking-feeling) emerges among actions, discourses and
territories inhabited by multiple experiences. It is a proposal from the
epistemologies of the South that creates and pays attention to
experiences silenced by a univocal form of storytelling, namely
Euroanglocentric academic norms. I do not claim that *sentipensar*
merely inverts the hierarchical, universalist spirit, as well as the
homogenizing eagerness of many academic ways of making sense of the
world. I see it instead as an intermittent moment that summons us to
mobilize from the multiple contributions that can add and coexist, with
all their tensions, to the digestive issues that afflict us today:

> *... *I read **trauma as synonym for mental indigestion**. And, on
> more than one occasion, I have proposed that art and **certain kinds
> of thinking may contribute toward our becoming **'**unstuck,**'
> obviously without changing anything in the physico-atomic reality of
> the half-lives characteristic of various elements*
> *[@marder_chernobyl_2016]

The persistence of nuclear energy and the effects of radioactivity are a
terrain that summons us and forces us to *stay with the problem*
[@haraway_staying_2016], as well as to *thicken* the understanding of a
damaged and ruined present [@tsing_mushroom_2015]. *Sentipensar* is a
dynamic action ... a concept that interweaves co/reasons, minds with
bodies, natures with cultures, materialities with discourses. The
territory and inhabitants of Chernobyl are an active memory that is
materialized and actualized through this concrete rewriting, given that
we collectively attempt to think-feel an event of the past through the
ways in which we are disturbed by its resonances. *Sentipensar* is about
unraveling ... through the practice of storytelling, by exchanging
stories with the *Herbarium* ... that radiate the different ways in
which the nuclear event continues on the narrative plane. However, the
event does not belong to us, but rather belongs to a materiality that we
regard as provisionally hospitable to collaborative intervention. We
think-feel re-writing as a collective incarnation in texts, and it is
precisely this plural task that indicates its disappropriation.

> Now that the creaking of the system is heard, we must continue to
> connect interstices, because the vital is in the links \[\...\] The
> indispensable jobs of caring for and maintaining life, cleaning and
> sustaining, the circularity of life, the reproduction of the
> conditions for living: preparing the food; washing the dishes,
> cleaning the bathroom and all the spaces; nourishing the body as an
> integral unit of emotions, sensations and needs, corporealities always
> in relation, because caring is etymologically linked to thinking ...
> [@garcia_bravo_hacer_2021]

# **1996** {#1996}

by Carolina Cuevas

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/wa7r7095/11668796951047.png){#n92pfz8rrpt}

There is a road. On the other side the cycads are resting. Yet it is not
the cycads but the sleepy plants that appear to me first on the edge of
that little path opening up between my grandparents' house and the
beach. Hidden among the low grasses that lead to the sea, the sleepy
plants respond to the gentle call of my fingers. They are so close that
I can talk to them with my touch. The cycads, on the other hand, live
across the road, on the side of the bushes and the cows. Surrounded by
footsteps and instruments that quantify their longevity and evaluate the
possibility of their survival after a hypothetical forced transplant,
the cycads, perhaps without realising it, continue their endothermic
regulation and exude the fragrances that summon their pollinators. I
play with the sleepyheads without noticing that a few kilometres to the
south, a Canadian mining company starts the prospecting work to install
an open-pit gold mine. Without noticing the steps, the instruments, the
cycads, the pit, the ***tepetatera*****,** the leaching yard, and
without realising that the pool where I play with my cousins, off the
shores of the 'El Farallón' lagoon, belongs to the housing camp of
Laguna Verde, Mexico's only nuclear power plant, I strive to remain in
my childish reverie: the ungraspable image of a wild mountain. *There is
an event going on, but I can't reach it*. There is an unnoticed
geographical triangle that at that moment is being drawn: the
sleepyheads and I in Boca de Ovejas, the instruments and the cycads on
Cerro La Paila, the glow of radioactivity in Laguna Verde. There are
countless physical processes that I do not perceive. The sleepyheads
fold when touched by my hands, the wind, the noise. The agility of their
movement is an acephalous response to the environment in which they are
embedded. The technician writes in his report that the cycad community
will not be harmed when mining work begins.

# The river

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/s9q40nuc/21668797038429.jpeg){#nw6pc0gad14}

I still remember the moment of leaving the house: the organisation of
the backpack, the hurrying and shouting at anyone who, for whatever
reason, took longer than expected, and then going on a long walk besides
the Cuautla river, where we met its characteristic fragrance of 'clean
and fresh water,' as we used to say. It was a kind of ritual set among a
great diversity of plants, small crustaceans and fish, aquatic insects,
stones and water running under an intense sun and a clear blue sky. It
continued until the idea grew, among schoolmates, that the river was an
exclusive concern of children. Adolescent life required other spaces and
practices to be recognized, so visits to the river became less frequent.
We stopped visiting the river with its vital smell and the sensation of
cold water and stones on our feet became sporadic. Then student life
caught up with me in Mexico City. I was barely out of my teens when I
had a room in a boarding school and university responsibilities in the
cold areas west of the megacity. I returned home, in Cuautla, every so
often and only for a couple of days. I had no time to visit the fragrant
river, but after some time I noticed how, little by little, between
visits, its flow, vegetation and fauna were becoming smaller and
smaller, as if the march of the population growth of that small city
resulted in its reduction and deterioration. The world where I was a
child no longer exists, and although I frequently return to that place
trying to capture, even for specific moments and spaces, that smell of
clean water, plants, stones and local aquatic fauna, I cannot find it
either by smell or sight.

# **Forgotten**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

The time to come remains imperceptible, hidden, flowing in the shadows
of oblivion. In Sarah Ruhl's *Eurydice* [@ruhl_eurydice_2008] the
shadows that inhabit the underworld and make up the chorus of the play
are actually living beings who plunged into the waters of the Lethes and
turned into stones when they died. Since then, they feel neither sorry
nor pity for anyone; they never laugh or sing. In fact, they feel
nothing. Nor do they speak. They have forgotten all the things of the
world. Their language is now the language of stones, the language of the
dead, a silent language. Entering Chernobyl's exclusion zone is like
plunging into the Lethe. Pripyat, like the underworld, seems to be
condemned, by its very nature, to human oblivion. However, compared with
Orpheus, who descends into the underworld and makes the stones weep with
his music, Marder and Tondeur's work can be interpreted as the song
that, rather than making the shadows weep, exposes their lament. Yet the
deafening silence of Pripyat is not unique. We don't know it, but there
are many Chernobyls, just as every river, including the Lethe, has
different courses which, without us realising it, often seep into the
earth we walk on or evaporate into the air we breathe. How many
Chernobyls, because they did not begin in a nuclear installation, have
passed (or continue to pass) unnoticed, and remain forgotten? In how
many walls built by contaminated rods do the waters of the Lethe not
flow? The time of an event is interwoven from oblivion, and it only
returns to show us in its ruins the passage of time.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/jrdijjcj/01635878402143.png){#nfvr9qthw9n}

# **Symptom**

by Deni Garcíamoreno Becerril

The concept of a *symptom* was popularised by the psychoanalytic
tradition and it was in the second half of the 20th century that it
leapt into the field of philosophy to refer to aspects from its critical
and not only clinical figure. Within a critical grammar the symptom
entails a temporal and spatial rupture that manifests a remoteness or an
apparent material impossibility. For instance, the images in the
*Chernobyl Herbarium* capture the nuclear *radiation *responsible for
the catastrophe that took place there. Marder insists that despite the
fact that the photographed plant does not contain the same amount of
radiation that some plant specimen may have had at the time of the
nuclear catastrophe, the *explosions of light* that reach to us now
generate an immediate relationship with the catastrophic and nuclear
spectrum that envelops the territory of the herbarium. Such a breaking
of the book's frame establishes a very particular temporal and spatial
(im)possibility. In fact, the perception of Tondeur's images generates a
symptom that touches both the* explosive* representations of nuclear
radiation and the bodily effects related to the *invisible calamity* of
the nuclear catastrophe. Is it possible to generate a non-visual
symptom, which starts from the memory of a taste or an image not
necessarily produced technically and by light? The already well-known
proposal of involuntary memory tells us yes: from tastes and smells it
is possible to generate an involuntary or non-involuntary symptom that
could take us back to another time that defies time and narrative
conventions. Beyond these sensory possibilities, what happens when the
symptom is not visible? What happens when it has not yet been activated?

# Explosions of sound 

by Yareni Monteón

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/9mw35p0v/01668193422896.jpeg){#ny5wi6qja6a}

Milo is a true artist, one from the street. His poetic tool is not the
image or light but sound; he is a musician. In his travels to the jungle
he also learned to carve stone like the ancients. When I met him, he
told me that someone revealed to him that the function of art for the
Mayans had nothing to do with representation, but rather that the artist
was 'the bearer of time'. We liked going to the beach. We would swim out
to sea until our feet did not touch the bottom. Then we would float on
our backs and lose our eyes in the sky. One of those days we swam in a
beach in which the oil residue, probably coming from the nearby wells,
stuck to our skin. It was true, on this edge of history there was no
virgin beauty; in every corner the kingdom of the non-living \[evil\]
was already nesting. At dusk, with the feeling of witnessing the end of
an era, with our palms and our voice we improvised some rhymes. We got a
requiem. We did not know if it was for the inhabitants of that sea or
for ourselves. It was the last time we swam together.

# We flee towards 

by Gabriela Méndez Cota

Why were they meeting in late August 2020 to read and rewrite *The
Chernobyl Herbarium*? Tired of the institutional culture of sacrificial
bureaucratisation, competitive individualism, 'publish or perish' and
other toxic fumes that left her breathless, one of them proposed to
guide the others toward a different climactic zone where none of the
hopeless fantasies prevalent in The University were likely to flourish.
That first meeting, like those that were to follow (on Zoom for two
years, now and then in the city of PubPub, and at a later point in the
West Midlands region of a former member of the European Union), was an
escape mandated by *angst* and co-sponsored by the Community-led Open
Publication Infrastructures for Monographs (COPIM) project. They would
have to spend some time working with transplanted memory fragments on
the outskirts of Global Knowledge Production, at the precise
intersection between a massive forgetfulness and a large,
attention-sucking technosphere. Fortunately, as Néstor Braunstein once
assured her, attention could still be directed by more than the
algorithm; it could also be summoned towards *the word* as an event that
exceeds calculus [@nkcis51zdfh]. In a roundabout way, they would insert
themselves into the world of language at the time of its expropriation
by the forces of hyper-industrialisation and a dangerously naive
mistrust of thinking itself, which was as prevalent in Mexico as it was
elsewhere in the West. In sum, they sought to escape from the
technological domination of language that would make life unlivable.
*But the impression that one can flee from the calamity that is our
civilization is no less immature than the sunny ideology of Knowledge
Production itself*. Was Michael Marder a genuine Author, the true
originator of 'his' memories? As rewriters of Marder, did they aspire to
be anything other than passive repeaters who first and foremost listened
in awe? Should they seek recognition as 'more' than receivers,
modulators, transmitters, remixers of *The Chernobyl Herbarium*? If
their rewriting came to be regarded as 'piracy', would they not be
pirating Marder's piracy of Svetlana Alexievich's *Voices of Chernobyl*,
and in the process returning to that earlier work a degree of
recognition for its diversity and for its attunement to biographies
other than the Author's own? Shall they not also claim Authorship within
this extended effort at developing their own singular voice? There are
no escape valves. By setting out to formally Reuse Open Access Material,
they were speeding toward another, still greater catastrophe, spawned by
the same total system: not 'liberal humanism' but the pernicious
ubiquity of an instrumental revealing of Being that undercuts existence
and prevails both in capitalist and anti-capitalist imaginaries. Still,
for a while unworking freely, unafflicted by schooled writing, they
spent the rest of 2020, and a part of 2021, on the shores of hypothes.is
and HedgeDoc where, unbeknownst to some, they would still be receiving
dangerous amounts of Knowledge from The University's fallout. Insert
references, provide information, explain this or that clearly, have an
argument or \... perish.

# Oregano orejón {#oregano-orejn}

by Yareni Monteón

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/nfxp2vca/21668796212265.jpeg){#nprnjxbffdu}

\[Argument:\] The state of exception is in fact the rule. At the
beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic, many political territories began to
declare states of exception. Just to give an example, in September 2020
[the Chilean State declared that it was renewing the State of
Exception](https://web.archive.org/web/20210119022335/https://lajornadasanluis.com.mx/internacional/renuevan-en-chile-estado-de-excepcion-por-pandemia-de-covid-19/ "null")
[@noauthor_renuevan_2020]. Mexico did not need to declare it; we have
been at war against drug trafficking since 2006, and since 2014 with the
Ayotzinapa case, we know that selective disappearance is completely
normal. Years of existing like this have shown me that life does not
need Rule of Law to continue striving to preserve itself and that the
economic system does not need justice to continue accumulating profits.
Everything has changed without the rigidity of consciences daring to
notice it, however life assumes the change and continues to strive to
exist. It was in this effort to continue resisting death that -- in the
midst of a pandemic -- I managed to recover what was left of my bike and
the *oregano orejón*, the plant that, by dint of pure adaptation, grew
at my departure at Milo's house. Oregano came home to live with me. No
one planted it, no one expected or wished for its presence and yet, even
among the toxic concrete of the urbanization that had tried to eliminate
the forest, and despite the shadow of the train tracks that the current
administration threatens to reactivate, it planted itself into
existence. Its usefulness to humans does not exhaust its meaning, but it
is also true that it found it useful to clone itself. Chalo, the first
thief of my bike, cloned it for his garden, and then I cloned it from
that garden. Now that being exists at least three times. Solidarity also
passes through utility. Among human beings, nothing is more useful to
our lives than another human being; it is possible to extend this to
non-human beings. The oregano is useful to me and we were useful to the
oregano: *In lak ech yéetel hala ken* as it would be expressed in
*Malixes* language.  

# **The Rewriter**

by Etelvina Bernal Méndez

> Mum confessed to me: you know, I hate flowers and trees. She said that
> and was frightened by her own words, because she had grown up in the
> countryside and knew and loved all that. The grass, the flowers ....
> Everything 'crackled' [@alexievich_voces_2019]

From Walter Benjamin's *The Storyteller* [@benjamin_narrador_2010] one
learns that some forms of human transmission are on their way to
extinction. Oral narration and the very power of storytelling do not
prevail in contemporary discursivity. It is, in fact, not only a matter
of telling and recounting, but also and above all it is about listening.
A listener pays attention. It may even be that he or she wants to keep
the memory of the story and, in addition, unexpectedly or unconsciously
receives the practical instruction to make knowledge known. If narration
entails a tale, a story, a gesture of speech, this is so for the sake of
the continuity of the life of others. Storytelling has an instructive
purpose which is often coded. It implies a passage, a transmission. Yet
the success of this transmission will be all the greater if its
intention is not evident from the outset, but rather engages narration
as the vehicle of mystery. This is quite different from data or
information transmission, or from contemporary algorithmic
classification. Generational transmission involves work with the story,
including active listening and interpretation on the part of a receiver.
It has a fragility and contingency that demands a work of relating and
listening. Whenever I read *Voices from Chernobyl* I find that, instead,
the text reads me. It mirrors me. It gives me the breath of life, shakes
me and makes me uncomfortable. It takes away my tranquillity and my
confidence in everyday life and in the apparent naturalness of my
immediate surroundings, in the simplest and most unthought of my own
actions, in their consequences. The chorus of voices, the stories, and
Svetlana Alexievich's way of listening and writing return to me a truth
about myself and my own life: my finitude and at the same time my
transcendence in the traces that my passage through the world will
leave. Could one ignore the legacy of those voices, overlook their
testimonies? How does one receive them? They shake my being in the
world, both through what they say and what they cannot say. They stir up
that which resists words and representation and all understanding. It
becomes necessary for me to resist reading, to pause. I can only read
from within a tension between not being able to continue and not being
able not to. Following Benjamin and Alexievich, I would have liked to
write a story about testifying to the reception and rewriting of *The
Chernobyl Herbarium*, a life story that was not written for meaning,
science, belief or as a purely aesthetic dissertation. A story that
spoke to life about life. A text that quickly found its resonance in the
one who receives and opens a letter. But I wasn't able to.

# **Ruin Collectors**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

*The Chernobyl Herbarium* proposes to 'fight against nihilistic
indifference' 'through a concerted effort of selecting, arranging, and
displaying traces ... as a commemoration and a warning'. Only in this
way, by collecting and curating the ruins of the catastrophe, working
from them and with their oblivion, will we be able to recognise the
testimony of its history as well as its decay (or, in other words, to
tell a story from its oblivion). Decades earlier, María Zambrano said
that ruins were the object par excellence for thinking about history.
For her, what is historical is not the facts summoned in the purity or
integrity of their past; what is properly historical is 'the vision of
the facts in their survival, \... what has remained of them: their
ruins. The ruins are the most living part of history, for only that
which has survived its destruction lives historically'. If this is so,
if ruins are those remains that survive the past, after the radioactive
events of Chernobyl, México, Brazil and so many others, how can we think
of all those bodies that resisted their own destruction? The
(im)perishable state of the fallen trees in the Red Forest is proof of a
life that survived its own cataclysm. However, it is clear that this
fact is not yet sufficient to be able to fully affirm its ruinous
character.

# Exposure

by Yareni Monteón

Milo was never my boyfriend but our friendship was very close. In the
time we lived together, he told me that he was orphaned at a very young
age. His mother fell ill with a cancer that they could never treat
because the health system of our city did not have the resources for it,
and any other episteme that recognized in the vegetables of our region
as capable of providing some care for such ills was dismissed by the
dominant medical institution. Not only radioactivity causes cancer, but
also glyphosate, one of Monsanto's signature herbicides with which it
has invaded the market for agricultural production. Not long ago, I
still saw this poison for sale in a store without any restrictions.
Could it have been the glyphosate that always goes unnoticed in our food
that caused her cancer, or perhaps it was the radioactive milk that then
President Salinas de Gortary [bought from Chernobyl and sold to the
poorest sectors of the population through
CONASUPO](https://culturacolectiva.com/history/mexico-radioactive-milk-chernobyl/ "null")
[@cara_day_2022]? Maybe nothing, maybe just the democracy of disease and
death. What I do know for sure is that Milo lost his mother, and a year
later his cirrhotic father committed suicide by drinking all he could
from the canteens that his parents had managed for generations in
Campeche, a port of pirates, *santeras* and sailors, leaving Milo and
his sister vulnerable, passive and defenseless in a world where love
does not exist and abuse of the strongest is everything. Children and
weeds are somewhat alike: they don't matter much in the adult-centered
world.

# 1928 {#1928}

By Deni Garciamoreno Becerril

I can't help thinking that I have never once seen *offline *the women
writers with whom I have shared a great deal of text on different
platforms and whom I have seen as living portraits constrained to a
homologated format in our video-meetings. Rewriting, at least in my
experience, went from being notes on loose sheets of paper, lines
interspersed in jumbled notebooks and concepts jotted down on coloured
grids glued to books to images saved in folders also jumble in at least
two devices, text files that have been saved, deleted, rescued from the
rubbish bin also framed on a screen and ideas saved in *apps*. At this
moment, for the fourth time, I am trying to recover one of the images
that the constant references to possible herbaria returned to me.
Somehow I went back to look for the specific frame on a museum page,
duplicated the image again in another file, only to realise that the
computer recognises the image and reproaches me that I have saved it on
at least four different dates: 19/11/20, 21/12/20, 12/04/21, 16/06/21.
Although it is likely that this code has left many more traces on the
half-screen. In any case, the image, a small digital symptom, is itself
part of a herbarium and a collection of animals in movement. It is one
of the most important stills from
[*Fordlandia*](https://felixblume.com/fordlandia/ "null")*
*[@smith_fordlandia_2014], the video that Melanie Smith made in 2014
about the colony that Henry Ford tried to found in 1928 on the banks of
the Tapajos River in the Amazon.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/qbbc0z8h/41682699943796.png){#n9m2zvk04uy}

Melanie Smith, *Fordlandia*, (México/Brasil, 2014). Video 30min -- HD --
color -- quadraphonic (4.0). <https://felixblume.com/fordlandia/> Min.
10:40.

Henry Ford in Brazil, an industrial colony in the Amazon, complete with
golf courses? Of course, to anyone who does not have the full context of
this Fordist utopia, the very idea will seem completely absurd. And they
would not be wrong. There are many newspaper articles that tell of the
process in which Henry Ford struck a deal with the Brazilian government
to allow him to establish a small colony around a large rubber factory
that carried with it the promise of industrialisation and economic
stability for the region. At the same time, the project promised a
throwback to the origins of the American countryside, where *true
American values* were anchored in pre-industrial farms. In any case,
Ford\'s intended temporal and spatial remount to *escape the
industrialisation he himself had sponsored* was only sustained (and by
fits and starts) for 17 years. At what point did Ford think it could
work? Most likely at the time he made the decision he was clear-headed
and informed by the economic estimate on which all his industrial and
financial decisions were based. Surely the variable he cared most about
controlling, because it could threaten Fordlandia to a large extent, was
that of the *human capital* that would be pouring into the factory. In
fact, there were several uprisings by the factory workers, but it was
not until an infestation of the rubber trees generated by the vegetation
itself that underpinned the abandonment and total failure of the
project.

# **Oaxaca is not green**

by Nidia Rosales Moreno

In a recent Instagram post from a popular bed & breakfast located in the
historic centre of the city of Oaxaca de Juárez, in Southern Mexico
(where I was born and currently live) the phrase 'Oaxaca is green'
appears below a series of photographs depicting green objects: some
earthenware vessels, the city's cantera streets and walls, the tiles in
the bathrooms, the fountain in its courtyard, a very *chic* decorative
installation of nopales with [*Grana
cochinilla*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cochineal "null"), and plants
and trees decorating the hotel's colonial architecture. The post has
some comments describing the beauty of the quarry that was used to build
the hotel, formerly known as Verde Antequera and which has become one of
the city's most prominent tourist attractions in photographs and
advertisements, the beauty of the plants and their characteristic glow.
The green in these images is a desire, a fantasy constructed from scraps
distributed at the speed of the Instagram algorithm. Oaxaca is not
green, at least not in the sense that tourist fantasies suggest. In
Mexico, water supply problems are mainly due to the failure of
pipelines, which are obsolete, leaky and ageing, causing losses of up to
60% of the liquid. Oaxaca is no exception; it has gone from being the
most biodiverse state in the country to seeing its natural resources
diminished. Five years ago, water shortages occurred during the summer,
when the heat wave painted the hills a deep golden colour. Nowadays,
drought occurs every high holiday season, in the months of April, July,
August, November and December. According to Los Servicios de Agua
Potable y Alcantarillado de Oaxaca (SAPAO), in 2021 the metropolitan
zone of Oaxaca suffered the greatest water shortage crisis in its
history. The water, which comes almost entirely from wells and a spring
in municipalities bordering the city, [has even stopped supplying some
areas](https://imparcialoaxaca.mx/la-capital/530262/2021-el-ano-mas-critico-por-escasez-de-agua/ "null").
Having always lived in the historic centre, I am accustomed to storing
water from time to time: a privileged situation compared to that in the
peripheries and marginalised areas. With the commodification of
everything, violent imaginaries appear about their bodies and
trajectories. These become entangled with the environmental crises we
are going through, the lack of green areas, the lack of water and
pedestrian infrastructure, the lack of a territory that can be inhabited
in more communal ways, more committed to life and space in common. ... I
don't quite know what will happen in this city, and to tell you the
truth it scares me a little to think that it will have similar problems
to other cultural capitals in the world, or that it's going to become
just an Instagram stage. Maybe that is why I turn to people who approach
environmental crises as dynamics connected to forms of community life.
Perhaps *there* we can find something that allow us to re-imagine the
links we establish with the plant world, as well as the distances we
have built between us. 

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/iakk9wd9/41642688778472.JPG){#npr2zomgyr9}

# In Uruk

by Sandra Loyola Guízar

The Poem of Gilgamesh was carved on tablets, in cuneiform script, about
five thousand years ago. It now seems like a technology of eternal life,
since it is writing that inaugurates human history as a quest for
immortality. It is also no coincidence that it arose in Uruk, the first
city in urban history. The poem recounts a journey in which King
Gilgamesh loses the only plant that could give him immortality (it is
stolen by a snake that rejuvenates by changing its skin). Defeated, the
king returns to his city, Uruk. Upon arrival he recognizes that only the
great wall that surrounds the city will survive him. Architecture and
the city are also forms of writing and, as such, devices of immortality.
In the 6th century A.D. writing was based on papyrus, but it was scarce
because it was expensive and difficult to make. Writing materials were
recycled: the paper was washed and written on again and again. The ink
was scraped off with pumice stone and written over again. Such documents
that retain barely visible traces of earlier writing on their surface
were called palimpsests. Perhaps all cities are palimpsests that tell
stories of destruction. The palimpsest of Mexico City has been written
over and over, with viceregal buildings erected on top of pre-Hispanic
buildings. Some elements of ancient Tenochtitlán's layout remain to this
day, like streets that were once irrigation ditches are gradually
sinking, and buildings that move as if they were ships when the ground
quakes. The city has been flooded for five hundred years because it was
founded on a system of lakes whose water, which has been gradually
erased, remains no longer as water but as sinking. Hence, in *La ciudad:
un palimpsesto*, Guillermo Tovar de Teresa tells the story of the
destruction of Mexico City and describes what still stands as that which
remains to be destroyed:

> The city that could not expand because of its lacustrine condition had
> to devour itself in order to grow. A church was demolished to build
> another on the same site \... Mexicans have the bad habit of
> self-devouring \... of building without destroying what already
> existed. [@tovar_de_teresa_ciudad_2006]

To settle implies to erase parts of the territory, any intervention
preserves the traces of previous writings on its surface. Cities in
general, but particularly Mexico City, are a recycled canvas where the
urban layout, street names, some buildings and walls only exist as
erasures of a past that is still inhabited and tacitly read. As King
Gilgamesh also found out in Uruk, we inhabit a materiality that survives
us. 

# **The autophagic condition**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

That Pripyat is a city frozen in time has become a shared belief, and it
could not be otherwise. The truth, however, is that different forms of
life have not ceased to sprout in the Zone; the only living entity that
has been excluded is the human being. At any rate, this does not mean
that the Zone suddenly banished the human from itself (as if expelling
man from paradise once again, as many often claim); on the contrary, the
alienation was and continues to be self-inflicted
[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. For this very reason, Marder proposes the
syntagma *alienation zone* (used in Russia and Ukraine) as a more
accurate description of what has happened there: the self-inflicted
transformation of the human being into a stranger to the environment of
which he was once a part. In turn, this is accompanied by a process of
*museification* of the world in which experience, including temporal
experience, has been annulled: we, being the excluded, the *aliens *of
the medium, have been making the world a museum. As in a museum, the
exclusion zone seems to be timeless; there '\[i\]t is still, and will
remain, April 1986' [@marder_chernobyl_2016]. Chernobyl 'may not be a
place at all, for its temporality and habitability have been irreparably
interrupted'. Such a *non-place* thus confronts us with an existential
enigma: 'how does one pass through what does not pass, what does not
become the past?' [@marder_chernobyl_2016]. However, it is not so much
that the world is a museum itself, but rather that it is a museum *for
us*. If Chernobyl is a *non-place*, it is so insofar as we can only
experience it, paradoxically, from the condition of the distancing and
inaccessibility it represents for us. The same is true of our experience
of time. If we feel that time does not pass, it is not because it does
not pass, but because it is an imperceptible time for us (and not only
imperceptible, but unthinkable: it is easier for our understanding to
conceive the idea of an eternity than a time of billions of years). For
that reason, Chernobyl is the scene of the unrepresentable. and that is
why it becomes so complicated to think history from that *non-place.
*Yet, it is false that Chernobyl is frozen in time, let alone in
history. On the contrary, its way of existing and 'surviving', besides
exhibiting our state of self-alienation, simply evidences the autophagic
condition into which Western thought has sunk. In this sense, what
really shocks us about a place like this is not so much the fact that it
represents the petrification of a city through its devastation, but the
fact that it is the devastation itself that is petrified for 'us'.

# **Springs**

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

When Cuautla was changing from being a rural to an urban town, Coca Cola
installed a production plant on an important aquifer a few meters from
the river, obviously without making public that the plant would be
installed on important springs and that it would absorb thousands of
liters of water daily. In exchange, the company promised to offer jobs
and progress to the incipient city. Little by little, the enchanting
metaphysics of capitalist modernity was taking shape. The industrial
plant began occupying a small plot of land in a place called Manantiales
and in a short period of time it reached the size of two enormous lots.
The name of the place ('Springs') is not a metaphor, because from that
place the water sprung at ground level, and together with the river and
other water channels surrounded the city, supplying water to eighty
percent of the total population of Cuautla. Today, almost three decades
later, water shortages and contamination are part of the difficulties
faced by several neighborhoods. Yet industries continued their arrival
and it became more evident that that adolescent attitude of leaving
behind nature and rivers to deal with a life more technophilic and
fascinated by the aesthetics of asphalt was, in reality, a kind of
spirit of the times, a metaphysics of which we teenagers were only
depositaries and a reflection. The industries, it was said, did good to
the small city by placing it on the road to development, leaving behind
the countryside with its backwardness, its poverty, to offer jobs to
thousands of people in technologically superior conditions. As an
illusory metaphysics, progress never happened, not until now, but the
dynamics of exploitation and extraction is maintained, extinguishing in
its path everything that is useful for consumption, not only water, but
all living things.

# **In Ayutla**

by Nidia Rosales Moreno

According to the Dictionary of the Spanish Language, which belongs to
the Royal Academy of Spain and has fixed and regulated the uses of the
Spanish Language since 1713, one of the meanings of *resistance* is 'the
group of people who, clandestinely as a rule, violently oppose the
invaders of a territory or a dictatorship'. What does it mean to
*resist* in Mexican territory? In Ayutla, a *Mixe* community in the
Sierra Norte of Oaxaca, people have not had access to water since 2017
because its inhabitants were violently deprived of access to the
Jënanyëëj spring, which supplies their drinking water. *Mixe* community
governance regards the spring as an ecological site that in turn depends
on a network of ritual meanings. In 'Resistance. A Brief X-ray' *Mixe*
linguist and social justice activist Yásnaya Elena Aguilar Gil observes:
'[Resistance, whether we are proud or tired of it, shapes the relations
and experiences of a world ordered by deeply intertwined, interlocking
structures of
oppression](https://www.revistadelauniversidad.mx/articles/cf748d27-98bf-4e24-88d8-e044f004a422/la-prohibicion-de-la-vida-social "null")'.
She emphasises the close interconnections between native languages,
communities and territories. To exist from that place is to wage a war,
to risk even the integrity of the body. Likewise, to exercise a voice
that must be heard, a voice that in the case of the author is also
enunciated from the collective. Languages cannot be thought of without
those who speak them, just as they cannot be thought of without the
ground on which they are spoken. For my part, I could not take part in
this battle, but I do recognise that this is probably the consequence of
a process of d*eindigenisation*, which is also the product of the
consolidation of a mestizo identity. A[s Aguilar Gil points
out](https://elpais.com/cultura/2019/09/08/actualidad/1567970157_670834.html "null"),
that has formed part of the nationalist ideology of mestizaje, a
mechanism of oppression by the Mexican state. When I say that I am
Mexican and that in my family the Zapotec language was lost with my
grandmother, and realize how recently I learned of this loss, as if the
language had disappeared naturally, as something that was bound to
happen and that was accepted with normality and distance. From Aguilar's
perspective, the disappearance of languages is neither a sudden nor a
natural phenomenon, but rather the face of the Mexican state's
systematic violence against 'speakers who have suffered discrimination
for a long time' [@aguilar_gil_que_2020]. Languages do not die, they are
killed.

** **

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/31dg8fm9/01642689520184.JPG){#n008hthp3ha}

# **The other plant**

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

Leonardo Martínez and Graciela Tovar are a couple who arrived in Cuautla
in the spring of 2013. They came from the southeastern state of Tabasco.
Leonardo had been hired to work on the electric power megaproject called
Proyecto Integral Morelos (PIM). Specifically, he would work on the
construction site of the Morelos Aqueduct, which would supply treated
water to the Huexca thermoelectric plant to cool its turbines. It was
through conversations with Leonardo and his wife that I began to learn
about what I had only heard about before; through them I understood that
the thermoelectric plant implied a radical change in the way of life in
the region. 'You can't lose it,' Leonardo told me, 'if you follow the
road to Oaxaca and have the panoramic Popocatepetl as a backdrop, you
will find it'. The thermoelectric plant stands in the middle of a vast
valley of farmland, generating a contrast that keeps it out of sync with
its surroundings. The mismatch is not only visual. For the neighboring
communities the industrial complex represents various affectations,
mainly to health and to their livelihood, that is, to the field. At the
end of 2011, the government of Felipe Calderón, through the parastatal
Federal Electricity Company, announced the beginning of the PIM works,
the main objective of this work was to satisfy the energy demand of the
center of the country, but, above all, to supply the regional industrial
zone led by the transnational Saint Gobain. To this end, they provided
for the construction of two combined cycle thermoelectric plants, a 160
km gas pipeline and a 12 km aqueduct for water supply fed by wastewater
that then flows into the Cuautla River. In the 520 pages of the study
called *Manifestación de Impacto Ambiental* that the Instituto Nacional
de Investigaciones Nucleares prepared as a legal requirement for the
construction of the thermoelectric plant, the existence and possible
affectation of the collective rights over the waters of the Cuautla
River is not contemplated, which reflects the null importance given to
the social and cultural factors involved. The start-up of the
thermoelectric plant represents the reduction of the river\'s flow,
which will immediately impact a 10,300 hectare cultivation zone,
directly affecting the right to food self-sufficiency and producing a
drastic productive reconversion of the region. The thermoelectric plant
would extract 245 liters per second from the Cuautla River, of which 60
would be returned to the riverbed with an effective loss of 185 liters
per second. The returned water, 'dead water' in the words of the
farmers, includes thermal contaminants because the water is discharged
at 40°C, seriously affecting aquatic organisms, plants, and animals.

It didn't take long for Leonardo and Graciela to adapt to the way of
life in little Cuautla. He would arrive in the afternoons from working
at 'la termo', as he called it, and after lunch he would go out with his
wife to walk for a short time, taking advantage of the fact that the
usual heat was diminishing and the wind was running a little cooler. He
said that the afternoon wind helped him to relax after the always
intense work days that most of the time took place under a scorching
sun. It was on one of those walks that I was able to chat with them and
we became friends. After two years of work, Leonardo began to worry that
the work on the aqueduct would soon be finished and with it his job.
Days went by and he had not found alternatives in Cuautla. So, with 'la
termo' finished, Leonardo and Graciela left the city. A new stage was
beginning: now the thermoelectric plant would produce energy and it
seemed that the only thing left to do was to wait, as always, for the
effects to be felt in the environment. In a way, the thermoelectric
plant also stands as a symbol of our exclusionary civilizational
paradigms, based on energy and the annihilating consumption of the world
to obtain it. We have been educated and fascinated with technology that
is powered by electricity without being aware of the consequences that
this brings to our lives. We have unknowingly cultivated an
extractive-destructive attitude towards the world, the same one that has
placed us on the road to self-annihilation. 

# **Gentrification **

by Nidia Rosales Moreno

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/qvd1swmr/71642688972630.JPG){#nir2wu3h8ig}

Is there a link between *gentrification* and water scarcity? The
displacement of the population due to the increase in rents and living
costs derived from the commercial use of the historic centre of Oaxaca
City goes hand in hand with the cultural policies of the state
[@de_la_cruz_gallegos_gentrificacion_2016]. This is part of a long
process that stems from state development plans implemented throughout
the 20th century. From the opening of the railway and the restoration of
the temple of Santo Domingo de Guzmán in the Porfiriato, the first
Guelaguetza in 1932, the professionalisation of tourism in the 1980s,
the creation of the Oaxacan Institute of Cultures and the State
Organisation of Artisan Producers of the state of Oaxaca, the
construction of the tourist walkway in 1987, to the restoration and
modernisation of some buildings in the 1990s, contemporary
gentrification is accompanied by touristification, the design of the
city for the enjoyment of tourism. In 'The turistification of Oaxaca
City's historic centre' professor Mabel Yescas Sánchez
[@sanchez_touristification_2018] points to a before and after the social
crisis resulting from the conflict between Section 22 of the National
Coordination of Education Workers (CNTE) and the government headed by
Ulises Ruiz Ortiz (2004-2010). This change came about in terms of the
direction that governor Gabino Cué Monteagudo (2020-2016) gave to the
state's cultural policies with the aim of cleaning up Oaxaca's image,
attracting tourism and investment, and generating economic spillovers.
The projects of the Alfredo Harp Helú Foundation (FAHHO), which began to
be generated on a large scale in 2007, are part of this new dynamic. I
believe that both gentrification and touristification have contributed
to water scarcity, via state policies that do not regulate and protect
the territory and the life that takes place there, that allow the
exploitation of natural and cultural resources for the benefit of the
few. For example, [in the context of a deforested city and
state](https://imparcialoaxaca.mx/oaxaca/245925/es-oaxaca-el-estado-con-mayor-superficie-deforestada/#:~:text=Oaxaca%20tiene%20una%20superficie%2 "null"),
the municipality of Oaxaca de Juárez recently authorised the felling of
1500 trees to widen the lanes of an avenue that leads directly from the
airport to the historic centre, [which led to a series of
protests](https://oaxaca.eluniversal.com.mx/metropoli/ambientalistas-de-oaxaca-protestan-de-nuevo-contra-tala-de-arboles-por-obra-no-estamos "null")
and [even a hunger
strike](https://oaxaca.eluniversal.com.mx/tags/markoa-vasquez "null");
fortunately, thanks to the [protests of
activists](https://oaxaca.eluniversal.com.mx/metropoli/ambientalistas-llegan-acuerdo-con-el-gobierno-de-oaxaca-para-que-avance-obra-de-simbolos "null"),
the project was modified for the benefit of the environment. 

# **A shelter made of bricks**

by Carolina Cuevas

In 1986, the Grupo Antinuclear Madres Veracruzanas joined the
anti-nuclear movement in Mexico. Caught up in the radioactive
entanglement of the Chernobyl accident, implicated in more than one way
in its trail of death, four women from Xalapa summoned thirty more women
to demonstrate their opposition to Laguna Verde every Saturday at noon
in the Plaza Lerdo for thirty years. Facing the federal government's
threats to apply physical and economic sanctions to those who engaged in
protest actions such as blocking roads, a group of teachers,
researchers, shopkeepers and housewives decided to stand in the same
place week after week, arguing that they were, as women and mothers,
*the faction of the population that could still question the reasons for
progress, science and technology at a time when we see our future
threatened*. Laguna Verde's first reactor was started off in June 1990,
after almost two decades of the plant's construction. By 1989, fishermen
near Laguna Verde had already denounced the discharge of radioactive
water into a lagoon near the nuclear plant. More recently,
physicist-mathematician Bernardo Salas, who investigates the dispersion
of anthropogenic radionuclides, has found unstable atoms of cobalt-60
and caesium-137 in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. This means that
radioactive waste which has gone untreated for more than twenty years is
present in the bodies of water that surround Laguna Verde
[@salas_mar_determination_2015]. Even if small-scale radioactive
emissions accumulate and are dumped on grasslands and animals, as
Claudia Gutiérrez, the spokesperson for the Veracruz Mothers, asserts,
these bodies, the grasslands and the animals, are not taken into account
by the External Radiological Emergency Plan, which was designed by the
Planning Committee for Radiological Emergencies in 1987. In the event of
an 'unlikely' nuclear accident, the plan establishes an evacuation route
for the (human) inhabitants of the region, as we read in a short booklet
that also lists household resources that can be used to protect oneself
against radiation: a handkerchief folded in 16 folds, a wet towel, a
shelter made of bricks.

# In Suc Tuc

by Yareni Monteón

I remember we were in Hopelchén, with the police hovering around our
public meeting and stalking the meal to which we had been invited.
Supported by researchers from the technical public school and the state
university, the beekeepers and producers of chile habanero had been
opposing the industrial agriculture that was developing on the other
side of the road, that one of the Mennonites. While the Mennonites
insisted on growing their monocultures of Monsanto-brand transgenic soy
that requires the use of glyphosate and is regarded as much more
competitive on the capitalist market, the beekeepers and habanero
producers continued to practice their non-intensive and organic ways of
sowing. I think it was the best meal I had in a long time. It was a real
diet: real meat, real chili, real corn. It is one of the few times in my
life that I have been completely sure that my food was not doused with
poison.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/3dqa2mpq/21668176711009.jpeg){#nlddukn9890}

# What is a herbarium?

by Gabriela Méndez Cota

Nine years ago I co-authored an artistic cookbook, [*En busca del
quelite perdido: recetario viviente para
Cholula*](https://enbuscadelqueliteperdido.net/ "null"), which invited
readers on a stroll through Cholula's streets, food and markets. As a
narrative it sought help from vegetal metaphors and allegories,
processes and phenomena, which contrast the cultural and political
demands of various constituencies: from various generations of native
inhabitants of Cholula, to expat academic communities who recently
joined the former in their defence of sacred rural and urban spaces
against expropriation by the state. While visual artists Ángela
Arziniaga and Luz Elvira Torres made fantastic images of plant-human
hybrids, I noted in an essay that an artistic cookbook is far from 'a
monumental contribution' shedding light on 'deep conceptual
connections'. Our cookbook was traversed instead by a group of 'family
resemblances' among weeds and/or among peoples. The aim was to undermine
the smooth and translucent narrative of human sovereignty, with its
insistence on the unity and stability of culture, and to replay its
history of aspirations to the immutable through a procession of elusive
beings, the 'lost' weeds or, in the indigenous language, Náhuatl:
*quelites*. Upon encountering Marder and Tondeur's herbarium, I
immediately got an inkling of what that earlier project had yet to
accomplish. It had yet to rewrite itself in conversation with others,
and to take on shattered, shaken, damaged witnessing capacities in a
time of 'knowledge economies'. Like the plants it houses, an herbarium
is essentially superficial, accentuating the shapes and colours of dry
specimens -- that is, surfaces refracting light. A rewritten herbarium
is still a surface-to-surface encounter of imagination with alphabetic
code. And it still seeks something of the curative force Marder has,
perhaps a little hurriedly, identified as 'the grace of art'. As he
explains, such a force is powerless to effect a change in reality. But
that powerlessness and desistence from depth are precisely its virtues.
Is it possible to be touched without a modicum of sentimentality?

# What is a herbarium? {#what-is-a-herbarium}

By Yareni Monteón López

Plant metaphors are not new to Western thought. In fact, according to
ecofeminist philosopher Alicia H. Puleo, the surrealists used vegetal
metaphors for the feminine-infantile-sensitive. There is a sinister
danger in any metaphor which denies the potency of childhood, women, and
the plant kingdom. The *femme-enfant* of the surrealists sustains a
dangerous hierarchy. In contrast to this conception of the vegetal, I
always like to remember carnivorous plants, who developed this crude
adaptation mechanism to obtain nitrogen in poor and swampy lands. No,
there is no virgin beauty. Nor is there innocence in the plant world.
The beautiful lilies can also be pests that threaten the life of other
species such as in the Lake of the Dead, located in Xochimilco.

# **The volcano**

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

The thawing of the Popocatépetl glaciers feeds the enormous pine trees
that surround this volcano and climb its slopes. In turn, these waters
feed small local streams, several intermittent and subway rivers that
hydrate life as they flow throughout the region. This is one of the
reasons why the volcano has been worshipped for centuries and is still
considered a deity by the locals today. I think about this while I am on
my way to Cuautla from Mexico City, I also think about the fact that a
short time ago I did not take into account that my route is similar to
that of the aquifers that flow into the Cuautla River, partially fed by
the thaws of Popocatépetl that give it both mineral wealth and the low
temperature characteristic of its course. There is a silent relationship
that runs and establishes itself under my feet, extending to Cuautla and
then to all of southern Morelos until it reaches the Amacuzac River. The
multiple links between the volcano and the river allow for the abundance
of plants that grow wild around the riverbed, but also plants such as
*Nastortium officinale* or watercress, cultivated on the banks of the
river in small artisanal dams. Other branches of the river carry water
for hundreds of local nurseries that grow floral and tropical plants,
other lands grow Galdiolus or Gladiola and some still grow cereals and
sugar cane (*Saccharum officinarum*). The economic importance of the
plants in the Cuautla region means that they are cared for and
cultivated, turned into merchandise and inserted into the commercial
circuit, thus, inscribed in the logic of profit, their growers do not
take into account the care of water resources or the condition of the
growing scarcity of water for the inhabitants of the region. Greenhouses
are located in greater numbers in some areas of the city and grow plants
of all kinds, from orchids to palms, flowering plants, tropical climate
fruit trees and temperate and even cold climate plants. They regularly
occupy large plots of land, since, like agriculture, their production
depends on the available land. These businesses dedicated to the
cultivation and distribution of plants require large amounts of water to
irrigate the plants; this has caused the surrounding residential areas
to face water shortages. Although there are many neighborhoods where
water is totally lacking one or two days a week, in the Casasano
neighborhood it is commonplace. Current living conditions have created a
metaphysics of independence from nature, producing a blind faith in the
relationships that make possible the accumulation of capital. Hence,
none of the associations of farmers or nurseries have been concerned
about maintaining the integrity of the river or the springs that are
neglected on the margins of the city and within it with significant
accumulation of garbage and dirt of different types. In spite of
everything and although the river is not visible in all the spaces of
Cuautla, the plants are the most visible part of the presence of the
river in the region, there is a deep and silent relationship with the
river that links the life of the families of the region, the industrial
activity and the plant life, an important network of silent
relationships that pass through culture and nutrition, although our
conscience formed in capitalism has not yet understood them.

# **Nostalgia, past and future**

 by Fernanda Rodríguez González

At the end of the 17th century, it was not uncommon to find men who
suddenly fell ill while travelling far away from their countries. In the
French language this condition was usually referred to as *mal du pays*
until the physician Johannes Hofer proposed a new concept that managed
to more accurately explain the phenomenon, namely: *nostalgia*. From the
Greek νόστος (returning home) and ἄλγος (pain), nostalgia became the
term of choice to describe a feeling of estrangement and non-belonging,
a suffering that came with being away from a past that men recognised as
a place of happiness and refuge, usually their place of origin or
homeland. Some of the medical treatments that achieved a certain degree
of success consisted simply in returning home or, if this was not
possible, in engaging in remembrance exercises of the past that the sick
person so longed for [@nsfdzyqm1ss]. Three centuries later, things have
changed dramatically. As in the 17th century, we suffer from a loss, but
unlike then, it does not seem that the  solution could lie in the
recovery (real or symbolic) of the place of origin. The remedy
prescribed for our time would rather have to consist in a flight,
because the place of origin, or indeed the past, has become a hostile
presence that makes us ill. What shall we call this new illness produced
no longer by the remoteness and separation from that origin and that
past, but by their presence? What name shall we give to this ailment
that arises when the environment in which we are immersed suddenly
becomes a strange and hostile world? In any case, no matter where we go,
it does not seem that flight is viable enough. The past casts its shadow
on a future that proves equally hostile.

# **2012** {#2012}

by Carolina Cuevas

A group of armed police and military personnel sit outside the municipal
palace of Actopan, Veracruz. Inside, representatives of Goldgroup Mining
Inc. detail the procedures that will be carried out once the extraction
phase of mining begins on Cerro La Paila. In techno-scientific language,
mine employees claim that the environmental damage will be minimal, that
cyanide leaching will be harmless because it *is like dissolving a
Coca-Cola in a vat of water*^***\ ***^[@npqiwufwp17], that any
earthquakes caused by mining will be of barely one degree on the Richter
scale, that hurricanes, winds, the proximity to Laguna Verde, are all
environmentalists' tales. They do not say that the head of the mountain
will be sliced off, that gold will be extracted from its entrails to the
point of exhaustion. They don't say it in these words because any
allusion to the mountain as a living entity, on whom a pit of explosives
will be forcibly imposed, could awaken the still vivid memory of the
imposition of Laguna Verde a few decades ago. Someone, to calm things
down, sketches the project\'s perimeter on a flipchart and tries to
convince the inhabitants that the impacts, if any, will be contained,
delimited, within this very small piece of the mountain, which is also
almost pure grassland. But someone else replies that since the drilling
began, the ***aguajes*** have dried up, and calls into question the very
notion of delimitation. The mine rumbles the mountain. Plant life, the
animals, the rocks, they are all choked off. The chemical stridency of
the mine can be heard in the bodies of those who can imagine the
infiltration of cyanide, sulphuric acid and other heavy metals into the
aquifers that flow down to the coast. The mine is not just the open pit
on the mountain. The mine is downstream. The mine is the acid runoff
that flows down to the mangroves. The mine is what opens the bodies to
an unfathomable vulnerability^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. A radiation
of another species settling on the water and mineral bodies to then
settle on the bodies that depend on the *aguaje*, on the lagoon into
which the water drains. Someone delimits the perimeter of the project,
and the whole basin is choked off. Another catastrophe is undermining
the mountain: the pernicious ubiquity of an instrumental handling of
nature^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. *How is it possible to want to
destroy such a bountiful land? *asks Don Ascención*. What is the point
of grabbing something now if there is nothing later?* asks Doña Rosario.
A cut in the earth-territory that strips the cycads of the ground they
stand on: a saddened environment. The body -- of the cycad, of Doña
Rosario, of the *aguaje* that Doña Rosario found dried out -- is not
isolated or wandering in a void, it is rooted in the web of life
[@moore_trama_2020]. How will all the plant intelligence that is to be
cut off be able to germinate on a decapitated mountain?

# **Re-writing Wisdom**

by Etelvina Bernal Méndez

'How fine it would be, Agathon', said Socrates in *The Symposium*
[@platon_dialogos_2005] 'if wisdom were a sort of thing that could flow
out of the one of us who is fuller into him who is emptier, by our mere
contact with each other, as water will flow through wool from the fuller
cup into the emptier'. In *Voices from Chernobyl*, it becomes clear that
we are not free, independent and autonomous particles, but clearly
subjects that depend on each other. All of us, on everything. But what
forms of relationship does interdependence produce, and is
interdependence the same at all times and in all places? Alexiévich
calls each story in her book a monologue, and each title in itself is a
poem. Each voice brings a legacy, a lesson, a wound and a consolation,
as well as a lot of questions. The stories are monologues that,
nevertheless, emerge from a dialogue. She comes to listen to the
witnesses, to the survivors of Chernobyl, for whom Chernobyl is a
crucial signifier in their lives. Her own witnessing presence is not
omitted from the stories. As the survivors address words, doubts,
complaints, and grievances to her, she receives and holds them without
erecting them as a monument to pain. Instead, she allows the stories to
transcend her as an interlocutor; she passes them on to others in a
graceful gesture of reflection and, in doing so, makes witnesses of all
of us. 'What to bear witness to, the present or the future?', asks
Alexievich in the interview with herself at the beginning of her book.
Thirteen years have passed since I first read that question, and its
sharpness still resonates strongly. It is not easy to understand. Its
sonority, attractive and powerful, reveals itself as the posing of an
enigma. Something that eludes discernment from the experience of things.
A paradox, a witness of the future? It seems absurd. In a certain
temporal logic, and in a certain conception of human consciousness,
testimony would be the full word of the witness, the confirmation before
others of what has happened, of *what has already happened*. How, then,
could one give a testimonial account of what is yet to happen? Perhaps
precisely to the extent that we recognise that it is not so much
consciousness that provides this knowledge, but precisely that which is
of the order of the unconscious. The transfer of an experience from one
generation to another requires deciphering. It is veiled, even if it is
evident. The knowledge of truth, or the knowledge that matters most to
the desiring subject is that which comes in the form of an enigma and
displays at the outset what is not understood: the illegible, the
diffuse, the edges of the story, that which explodes the conscience and
makes it burn with questions and reflections: Why, and how did this
happen? If we can know anything at all about truth, it is through work
with the enigma. This work does not take place by contiguity, simple
contact, conversation or coexistence between two people. Instead, it is
about the practice of cuts and the introduction of certain punctuations.
This is an art, more akin to craftsmanship than to industrial
production. It takes time and style. I am interested in Alexievich's way
of editing testimonies, insofar as it does not conform to journalistic,
historical, political or even literary or aesthetic registers. She keeps
the pen and the tension in the chiaroscuro of discourse, in a grey zone.
She accentuates twists, links that are at once subtle and exposed and
not immediately clear to the human conscience, revealing that nothing is
merely alien and everything is at stake. In a tragicomic juncture, one
of her voices says: 'What to talk about, death or love, or is it the
same?' Such a literary delivery is something other than mere
transcription or full reportage. Svetlana's *rewriting *of the
testimonies gives an account of the unconscious. It bears witness to it.
Hence the renewed strength of legibility that it brings. No attempt is
made to cover it with new false veils that presume completeness. The
manner and style of its stories cannot be capitalised on. They keep open
the lid of the reactor, the astonishment, the exploded consciousness.
Resisting comprehension, the stories urge a collective work of reading,
listening and rewriting. *The Chernobyl Herbarium* can be read as a
continuation of the editing/rewriting device that is opened by *Voices
from Chernobyl*: a device for memory transmission, for listening and
paying attention to the consequences omitted from the immediacy of
consciousness, the ear or the eye. It is a way of drawing attention to
the omitted history, to the suffering of the people, to the silent (or
silenced) testimony of the plants, to the recognition of exposure
without escape.

# **Dispossession** 

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

> The present is the total sum of all the political violence of history:
> the colonial processes of the past, and the terraforming that came
> with them. This is why the attempt to predict the future can be
> understood as a mixture of impotence and lust for power
> [@aranda_rescatando_2018]

In their preservation and isolation we discover an appropriation that
inscribes in the ruins a crime against history. While the abandonment of
the ruins in the world, to which they belong and which they compose and
decompose by their mere presence, shows us the historical course (simply
and plainly what happens in time, with that precise impersonal character
that denotes not what one has done but what has been done), their
isolation from the world reveals an attempt to take possession of time
and history, to become its author. Nothing could be more contradictory,
because one seeks to author what one does not own and because, in the
eagerness to preserve the ruins as monuments that worship the past, the
horizons that show us the passage of time are closed off. This is what
we have called, like many others, *museification*. The museification of
the ruins thus translates into an attempt to annul the past and to
conceal the future; in other words, as an attempt to interdict the
possibility of temporal experience: the only thing that is experienced
there is an *eternal present* (so that the past only functions as the
sum of all the accumulated facts that justify the present and the future
is no longer the announcement of the futurity of the (im)possible but
the confirmation -- known or unknown -- of the present). Contrary to
what is often believed, what the museum exhibits in the preservation of
ruins is not history, but its dispossession. But, moreover, the ruins
torn from their own worldliness also announce the withdrawal of life. We
wondered, then, what was happening in the exclusion zone so that the
life that inhabits it could not finish dying. What must be understood
here is that to kill is not to give death, but to take it away: the
dispossession of life is at the same time the dispossession of death.

# Just stop oil?

by Yareni Monteón

The house I lived in with Milo is near the train tracks. I remember the
times when the train woke us up and we had to wait an eternity for its
furious metallic sound to pass and we could get to rest again. It
happened once a month, and yet feeling close to the metal beast shaking
the earth and air was violent. Its transit was infrequent because it did
not transport people but oil oil extracted from the depths of the sea,
which also spills and intoxicates the water. Oil is our
post-revolutionary fetish for economic development in Mexico. Today,
even with everything we know about the dangers of continuing to exploit
this mineral, the public administration continues to insist that it is
our only source of wealth. When the train tracks are rehabilitated and
tourist traffic becomes heavier, and all sentient beings suffer even
more from their transit, the progressive nightmare will be fueled with
oil. ... When I had a job I spent my salary on gasoline: I am a normal
sinner. Later, I could no longer consume oil and my only option for
mobility was reduced to using my own metabolic energy, which sadly also
needs me to devour other living beings to obtain it. Violence is one of
the edges that make up the horizon of reality. I don't think there is
any sin-free energy. The question for me is, what of all this extractive
violence is necessary and how much more is it for mere greed?

# Our non-biodegradability

by Xóchitl Arteaga Villamil

In the thickness of our present there is the ubiquity of plastic: a
computer to work with, a note pen, syringes, bubble wrap, gloves, mouth
wraps, face masks, intubation material for those whose breaths escape
from them. Anything with plastic packaging that was consumed 30 years
ago or more is slowly disintegrating into microplastics, releasing
additives and other toxic substances wherever it is found: oceans,
rivers, forests, deserts, glaciers or bodies of organisms.

> Indistinguishable from its opposite, radioactive decay connotes
> stuckness, the indigestion of matter as well as that of the psyche. It
> does not stand alone: the spread of plastics, with which deserts and
> sea-beds are strewn alike, is another corollary to spiritual-material
> constipation, our lamentable non-biodegradability
> [@marder_chernobyl_2016]

Every time a plastic disintegrates, it releases chemical substances that
are toxic to the surrounding environment, microscopic particles that can
be mistaken for food by marine species, or easily assimilated due to
their tiny size, and can also enter the metabolisms of terrestrial
living beings. The presence and decomposition of micro/plastics and
their additives haunt, for instance, the breeding process of Pacific
albatross pairs ... causing a scenario of highly malnourished albatross
parents and mothers [@dooren_flight_2014]. The presence of additives
generates more fragile shells that break before hatching time,
interrupting the full development of the hatchlings. If they survive,
they will also be fed a plastic diet, because it is impossible for birds
to distinguish plastic from food. The challenge of *staying with the
trouble*, as Haraway puts it, is to avoid the immobilizing route of
total cancellation of plastics while problematising the ways in which
these materialities are entangled with life and death, and to devise
plural routes of action to avoid their overproduction and mass
consumption, without forgetting the channeling of those that are already
trash and the dangers of their disintegration
[@liboiron_redefining_2016]. The *sentipensares* and practices of
techno-scientific disappropriation of the research group CLEAR (*Civic
Laboratory for Environmental Action Research*) play a relevant role in
tracking and understanding the inevitable coexistence with plastics;
their work invites us to imagine possible ways of going through the
trauma of plastified coexistence, because they disappropriate the
traditional ways in which experiments are conceived, designed and
applied.

# The ruins of history 

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

Faced with the undeniable problem of the world's uninhabitability, the
calls for an ecological conscience that manages to reconcile and care
for its environment are abundant. The problem is that, ultimately, they
remain rooted in a nostalgic notion of pristine Nature that must be
recovered if we are to ensure our own salvation. Hence, most such calls
are incapable of thinking about future modes of existence, for they
remain anchored in an idea of survival that is understood simply as the
continuity and extension of our present. It is not surprising, then,
that faith in instrumental reason finds its reaffirmation as the only
one capable of guaranteeing the ideal of self-preservation and
durability through the administration of life (and salvation). But it is
not the 'end of the world' that lies in wait for us; the
post-apocalyptic future we have been dreaming of for so long has already
reached us, it is already here. Baudrillard knew this very well and had
a point when he wrote that 'our epoch no longer produces ruins and
vestiges, but only waste and residues' [@baudrillard_ilusion_2006]. But
does this mass production of waste really mean that we can no longer
speak of ruins, that their appearance is now an impossibility and
therefore we can only speak of them with nostalgia as when we speak of a
lost and distant object, typical of mythical times? If for so long it
has been asserted that ruins are the object par excellence for thinking
about history, what does this imply for our understanding of history
and, more specifically, for historical work? Have we reached a point
where we can no longer speak of history? There are thus two options:
either we abandon the idea of ruin once and for all, or we end up
recognising its historical (conceptual) transformation so that we begin
to conceive of debris as the new mode of appearance of ruins. In either
case, what this would mean is that history, far from continuing with its
monumentalising trade, must now concern itself with its residues, with
making a mythopoetics that makes it visible and makes its history
visible. Making history of the present means, at present, making history
of our waste. After all, it is the waste that shows us the ruins of the
future, they are the window to a future in ruins.

# San Lorenzo

by Yareni Monteón

The first time I went out with Milo, it was to the hotel at Playa San
Lorenzo, an abandoned construction that was the product of the diversion
of public funds by El Negro Sansores (governor of the state of Campeche
in the sixties, and father of the current governor) and was left
unfinished. Back in the days of El Negro Sansores, the dream of progress
was to turn each beach into a tourist amusement park so that foreigners
with money could spend the morning disturbing turtles, sponges and
starfish with their jet skis; in the afternoon they would receive a
relaxing massage from some exotic amerindian beauty -- who would surely
look just like me -- in exchange for a paltry tip, so that finally at
night and under the dim light of the moon their body excretions could be
spilled to the place where the shoals rested the fatigue of the day.
Fortunately for the vegetal and marine beings of San Lorenzo, those
pestilent businesses did not turn out well and the dream of progress did
not come true. The hotel was transformed into a surreal garden in which
jungle trees, weeds of all kinds, cacti and wild magueys occupied the
most luxurious rooms. Only plants, some non-human animals and intrepid
vagabonds dared to inhabit, not because the concrete was more fertile
than the land that had been taken from them or was not toxic, but
because those who felt they owned it had failed.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/2uty6cz1/61668176640385.jpeg){#n7uqdc8gep3}

There, where Man sees his civilising dreams ruined, is defeated and
becomes a victim of the tragedy that he himself has written, Life gets
an opportunity to adapt, mutate and strive. Mutations do not come
without pain or the uncertain passage of what we have conceptualised as
death, but I also remember the wisdom of Epicurus and the prophecy of
Spinoza: death is only a fiction of the insane and Life -- not existence
-- is infinite. However I do not fool myslef, their return is not a
definitive triumph, because the Maña Train -- which is propelled by the
same rhetoric and the same practices that produced the Hotel -- stalks
us. How does one pass through what does not pass? It cannot be done,
because what we want to pass, has stopped happening. The enemy has not
stopped winning and even the dead are not safe. 

# **In Fordlandia** 

by Deni Garciamoreno Becerril

The images that make up Melanie Smith's *Fordlandia* create a contrast
between the forms of life that have reclaimed space in the ruins of
Ford's industrial colony. The water tank that supplied the space
reserved for the Americans, and various vestiges of machines are all
ruins in which the last thing to disappear will be the legend *Made in
USA*. For a few minutes, in the first (night) scene, we hear the
crickets *crunching*, the chirping of birds, the shrieks of monkeys, the
breeze dissolving in the trees. A reptile cuts this repetitive, circular
sequence by plunging violently into the water, in an abrupt splash that
breaks with the *ambient sound*. The third shot is the shadow of the
plane carrying Fordlandia. The auditory element is retained, but it
changes category: we now hear the loud turbines filtering through the
plane's wobbling metal structure. ... Perhaps recapturing the vegetal in
*Fordlandia* was not Melanie Smith's main motivation. Despite the
hierarchy of tensions between sound/animal image and motorised,
industrial sound/image, the material aspects of the recovered image give
an account of the vegetal that rebels even in the peacefulness of
movement and from the background that they constitute in relation to the
animal. For the rest, the video shows only one image that explicitly
refers to the *vegetal setback* that the Fordist colony encountered.
This image is also mediated by animal sound, but it is the first one
that gives a panoramic view of the vegetation in the foreground and
sends part of the ruins of the Ford factory into the third plane. In
addition to the perspective, the variable colour is something that gives
a specific indication to this image. It is clear that some kind of
filter or modification of the film on which it was shot is present. The
sequence that begins at 10:39 invites speculation that it may have been
shot on 35mm or 16mm film, as opposed to the other sequences that were
clearly shot on digital film. There are two possibilities: either a
filter is present that specifically modifies the greens, or they are
using a *lomochrome* that changes the values of the colour gamut and
again changes the greens to purple. In fact, the ambient sound is
replaced by a destabilising movement of the shot, which also contrasts
with the perfectly framed background in the previous sequences. The
purple is not present in absolutely all the greens (which would make us
think that perhaps it is a filter made in post-production, but which
also wanted to make the digital element invisible), but it begins to
acquire more strength as we go deeper into the shots, as the plants get
closer and envelop the industrial structure. We could say that there are
two noises that make a symptom in the image: the visual and the
auditory, and the differential of the image with respect to the other
sequences is the visual one. The green is purified to distinguish it
from the photoreception of the peaceful green. The unruly and revolted
green is shown to us through an inversion of the visible values. The
green that triumphed over concrete and steel, and subverted the illusion
of flight.

# **In Soot City**

by Yareni Monteón

When I escaped to Soot City, I met Omar Zamudio through a mutual friend.
Omar is a historian and documentary-maker. Although I don't really like
cinema, we became friends by going to see Hitchcock films. In those
outings I told him about my research work on the territorial defense of
Lake Xochimilco, which was guided by my concerns about environmental
devastation, its relationship with public space and certain
autobiographical concerns. He had similar concerns, to the extent that
his last investigation had been on Milp Alta -- a territory that is
geographically and historically close to Xochimilco -- in which he
documented the autonomous initiative by neighbors to obtain bioenergy
from agricultural waste that was produced in their territory. Both
Xochimilco and Milpa Alta are mayoralties with strong indigenous roots.
They still speak in classical Náhuatl there. The last communal lands
resist in Milpa Alta, a remnant of the agricultural distribution that
was achieved by the Zapatista forces of the Mexican Revolution. They are
systematically marginalised, plundered and impoverished lands, but by
dint of pure life they continue to exist. Omar's recording does not
focus on systemic violence but on the virtue of adaptation: we inhale
pain to exhale compassion and peace [@omar_zamudio_nopalera_2021].

\[iframe element\]

# **In Anenecuilco**

By Sandra Hernández Reyes

Among the areas affected by the decrease in the Cuautla river's flow is
Anenecuilco, Morelos, a community belonging to the Villa de Ayala
municipality, a neighbour of Cuautla and hometown of the Emiliano
Zapata. When I was a child, I was there on numerous occasions. A vast
expanse of sugar cane, tomato and rice fields made up the landscape.
Even if today the countryside is not the same, the vast cane and rice
fields continue to dominate the valley. The scenery extends to several
municipalities located in the south of the state of Morelos. Agriculture
has been the source of subsistence for a significant percentage of the
population ever since the Mexican Revolution (1910-1921) transferred
land and water from the hands of the landowners to the peasants for
usufruct. Today, many women and men still remember this thanks to the
oral tradition still alive in their families. But it is not only in
memory. From the encampment where the *ejidatarios* of Ayala watch over
the periphery, a hanging banner can be seen that testifies to the
validity of the agrarian ideals of Zapatismo: 'Again we fight, for land,
mountains and water!'

# The sound of your world

by Yareni Monteón

When Milo was one year old, the nuclear accident occurred in Chernobyl.
I was born the year in which the Berlin wall and the so-called real
socialism reduced its existence to an anecdote from Universal History.
In the West, the 1990s were a decade furrowed by a nihilistic and
apolitical attitude from which neoliberalism fed. Any ideology that
claimed an alternative to capitalism and liberalism was no longer
branded as dangerous but as naive or downright silly. It was at the end
of that senseless decade that Milo was orphaned. When he was eighteen
years old, the Law granted him the right to dispose of his diminished
patrimony. What he did with it was what any other nineties teenager of
that age would have done with a few thousand devalued Mexican pesos at
his beck and call: he bought an old van, called his friend Isaac --
another orphan -- and the two set off on an adventure towards the
Chiapas jungle, a place that over some years of coexistence was
revealing its mysteries to them. They first reached Palenque and later
they reached San Cristóbal. They were never hungry or helpless. The
environment that adopted them vibrated with renewed airs that blew from
the autonomous territories. When I was born the Berlin Wall no longer
existed, for my fourth birthday the Zapatista Army of National
Liberation (EZLN) rose up in arms and declared war against the Mexican
State and denounced the evils of capitalist globalisation.

'Did you hear?

It's the sound of your world falling apart.

It is ours resurfacing...'

[@noauthor_declaracion_2017]

# **Cycad-thinking**

by Carolina Cuevas

According to Michael Marder, plant-thinking operates by multiplying its
extensions, by contiguity with and adumbrated exposure to that towards
which it extends [@marder_plant-thinking_2013]. From this perspective,
Laguna Verde demands that we attempt to think what bodies feel, or
perhaps to feel what bodies think, what they register in their
materiality, which is already enfolded in the nuclear infrastructure: a
lagoon and an unstable atom, a grassland and a steel structure, the
inhabitant of an *adobe* and palm house and a wet towel. Ecological
mistreatment spreads and accumulates through the physical structures of
the corporealities that inhabit and make a place. A sick body is a sick
territory, says Lorena Cabnal, and bodies become sick because violence
and pain remain impregnated in the bodies they pass
through^\ ^[@lopez_lorena_2018]. Let us try to understand the
body-territory through plant life forms, that is, by listening to the
muted world of plants on this mountain that receives the humidity of the
gulf.  Over here, crouched in the holm oak forest, clinging to the
little soil that the rocks offer, a community of Chamal cycads continues
to grow. The cycads *Dioon edule* are perhaps the oldest living plants
in Mexico according to biologists and ecologists who also call them
'biocultural and archaeobotanical heritage', threatened 'biodiversity'.
On La Paila, there could be individuals as old as 2500 years: living
fossils: plant relicts from the Palaeozoic era. To think like a cycad is
to germinate crouched among the rocks of the mountains where they were
displaced, to retreat into mineral sanctuaries, to weave themselves into
a precarious entanglement. Cycads interpret the changing land use of the
region through their very physicality, the brute fact of having a
physical extension, open to all^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. They do so
by extending towards the gulf and towards the holm oak forest, by
becoming entangled among the rocks. We might be unable to understand the
mechanisms a cycad has developed over millions of years so as to listen
and respond to its surroundings, but *each seed and leaf is a vegetal
interpretation of its environment*^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. Each
cycad located on a particular portion of this mountain grows in a
moderately inhospitable site, barely clinging to very little soil, with
so little water, so little nutrients, and still forming dense
populations [@vovides_dioon_1987]. But cycad-thinking allows us to
understand that a coast where extensive cattle farming has been imposed
is also, itself, a cycad that retreats to the upper part of the
mountain. A coast where sugar cane monocultures and pesticides were
introduced as part of developmentalist technocracies is also a cycad
that loses its pollinator. Finally, it entails wondering about the
mechanisms found by the abstract dream of modernity found in order to
materialise in the form of steel hulks, pipelines, cylindrical pills,
cruciform bars, and to promise jobs, wealth, progress, *a nodule of hope
for many
peoples*^***\ ***^[@altamirano_miranda_chernobil_2018]^***\ ***^in
exchange for imprinting an imperceptible radioactive register on the
bodies around it. Such a silent and invisible mantle establishes a
geography of differentiated vulnerability: here, slow death, there,
cancer, here, threat, there, barely perceptible extinction.

# **Junkyard II**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

It may seem that what happened in Ciudad Juárez in 1984 was an
exceptional case, a product of bad luck. It is hard to believe that such
a thing could happen again, except that it did so three years later
under almost the same circumstances in Goiânia, Brazil. Again, two
rubbish collectors entered an abandoned hospital and found a machine,
which they dismantled and subsequently sold to a scrap yard. After a few
days, the owner of the depot noticed something that caught his
attention: in the newly purchased machine there was a capsule from which
emanated a blue glow, a kind of powder or stones that, he thought, could
be very valuable. He decided to extract the contents, to take it home
and share it with some of his friends and family. What happened next is
already clear: several people were sick and five victims died from the
radiation. Panic-stricken, many of the inhabitants of Goiânia opposed to
the burial of dead within the area, fearing that their bodies posed a
danger, even though they had been decontaminated and buried in lead
coffins. They saw each body as a threat, as a 'radioactive battery'.
Their efforts, in any case, were futile: the burials took place and the
graves were sealed with concrete. Fear, on the other hand, did not
cease, but spread /even further. Local commerce declined, as no one
wanted to risk buying contaminated food or objects. Several inhabitants
decided to leave the city [@nepomuceno_brillo_1987].

# Silent Witnessing

by Gabriela Méndez Cota

It is incredibly difficult to talk and write about rewriting. No serious
book on the subject has been able to avoid the task of thinking about
the conditions of possibility of rewriting in proximity to the scene of
academic capitalism. Still, before commencing, a work on rewriting must
first decide how to broach a theme that incessantly reverts to the
unthematisable. As we have seen, *the very structure of witnessing
breaks down where the event, with all its extraordinary, groundbreaking
and death-bearing potential, merges with everyday life thanks to its
imperceptibility*. What is there to say about exposure to rewriting that
cannot be seen nor smelled nor heard nor touched nor tasted? Those of us
who have been in its eerie neighborhood have resembled objects, onto
which certain effects have been inflicted, as opposed to subjects aware
and in control of what is going on. Bypassing our consciousness, *The
Chernobyl Herbarium* has been incorporated into us, becoming a part of
the flesh: the images of radiated plants accumulated in the thyroid
gland; the elements of testimony that, imitating philosophy, have bound
themselves to the bones \... *Authorship has been exploded, not so much
as an aftereffect of a violent shock, but thanks to becoming
superfluous*. What is there to say, save for certifying the death of
authorship, which has outlived its usefulness when it comes to helping
to orient us in our environs in the wake of an unwieldy, unmanageable
writing that it, itself, had brought into being? All that remains is to
perform an autopsy on academic authorship and to write its obituary,
while envisioning, in the best of cases, the birth of another rewriting
\...

# **San Román** {#san-romn}

by Yareni Monteón

I have two recurring dreams. The first is when I walk along the train
tracks to get to the Hotel San Lorenzo, the second is when I dream of
the San Román cemetery. San Román is the oldest cemetery in the city of
Campeche, Mexico. It was built at the end of the 18th century. The only
plant beings that inhabit it permanently are six huge trees that I
suspect have been there since 1700 or earlier. Everything else is white
bones and white marble. After centuries, few sprouts of life make their
way through the lapidary ideology of modern eternity: in the 18th
century, society wanted to make sure that the dead stayed dead - that
vampires did not return from the grave - just as they wanted to make
sure that the radiation, well enclosed in its sarcophagus, did not
return to suck the life out of us. This dream by contrast almost always
leads me to remember the cemetery of Amecameca and its cheerful pumpkin.
The orange flower-covered tomb blurs the line between life and death.
The final judgment and the resurrection are not in the future: mercy is
conjugated in present. 

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/etltzwe8/11668189450787.jpeg){#nvhagc7snnj}

Playa San Lorenzo and Lake Xochimilco are located in two different
Mexican states or provinces -- Campeche and Mexico City, respectively.
For me, their bond is both physical and psychic. Physical because during
my first years of life I fed on vegetables grown in the chinampas of
Lake Xochimilco, which in turn  fed from the black waters of the lake
contaminated by sewage from the City. And then, in later years, I was
able to move, feed and swim in a sea also polluted by sewage from the
city and tourist activity as well as oil extraction. Psychic because
when I imagine the water cycle, I see the polluted water of the lake
next to which I grew up raining on the sea. Fresh water and salt water:
the same polluted water only in different places.

# Inbetween

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

> What is ruined is ruined by the 'passing of time'. But what is this
> something ruined, something, what? Something that was never entirely
> visible; the ruin keeps the trace of something that, even when the
> building was intact, did not appear in its fullness*
> *[@zambrano_hombre_2020]

A distinctive feature of ruins is that they function as sacred places,
since they 'incarnate the inexorable link between life and death; *the
downfall of what man has proudly edified*, already defeated, and the
survival of that which he could not achieve in the construction'
[@zambrano_hombre_2020]. So, where are the ruins or the testimonies of
what has happened, and what are the ruins or the testimonies of what has
happened? Can we recognise the ruins of history only in the demolished
works of human endeavour? By resorting to a metaphorical use of
edification, Zambrano not only restricts to a very limited group the set
of objects that we can consider as historical, for she excludes from
this category everything that is not the product of human labour. At the
same time she seems to end up reaffirming an apparently incontestable
hierarchy between the *human world* and the *natural world* that
distinguishes modern thought. Thus, for example, she will go so far as
to say that, just as 'building is a triumph of man over nature, so too
is history' [@zambrano_hombre_2020]. The plant life that sprouts freely
among the ruins (symbol of pure life and its transforming power) is, in
turn, the sign of the sinking of history into nature, and a symbol of
'the peaceful revenge of the humiliated earth' [@zambrano_hombre_2020].
The plant life that springs from the margins and chinks of the ruins
represents -- if we follow Zambrano\'s assumptions -- a process of
inversion and superimposition in the relationship between history and
nature. Over time, all construction (including history itself) will
irresistibly bend to the force of nature. The natural, in turn, will
function as that force that demands its own redemption and the
restitution of its sacredness. If vegetation is a symbol of pure life
and transforming force, it is because it is a life that is born of
death, of the dejection and destruction of what humans have built, thus
liberating nature from the force that once claimed to subdue it (hence
its appearance is interpreted as the moment of revelation of the
sacred). From this perspective, it would seem then that *ruin*,
understood as binding (or rather as *religare*), would be nothing other
than the possibility of peaceful reconciliation between the human world
and the natural world that restores a certain original state previously
lost: that of the *humiliated earth*. Zambrano's romantic vision of
nature is, on this point, undeniable. A nostalgic tone can be perceived
in the reflections she devoted to thinking about nature, plants and the
earth. However, if we point out these limits, it is not in order to
generate a hasty judgement that simplifies what has been expressed. On
the contrary, they are the starting point to begin to generate a deeper
reflection that foregrounds certain aporias and fundamental questions
regarding the ruinous character of human works and their function.

# **Nuclear graveyards**

by Sandra Loyola Guízar

What would happen if ten centuries or ten thousand years from now,
humans or other species decided to dig or do archaeological work and
unearth the entrails of our 'excrement' stored in concrete-covered
sarcophagi? This question, which has preoccupied researchers since the
1980s, raises a problem of nuclear semiotics. How do we convey a message
of radioactive danger buried deep in specific areas of the Earth? What
signals are needed for the potential inhabitants of the human and
non-human future? How can we ensure that they understand our messages of
danger from the past? It is also a design problem that the Waste
Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) has been trying to solve since 1983 for the
geologic nuclear repository of tunnels and caverns, built more than 600
meters deep in the Yucca Mountain Desert, New Mexico, where the U.S.
military's most hazardous nuclear waste is located. This is one of the
first geological repositories of nuclear waste, which will be filled in
a couple of decades and sealed with concrete. A monumental 'Do Not
Enter' sign will be installed and another one buried at 20 feet. The
WIPP has involved linguists, archaeologists, anthropologists, engineers,
psychologists and science fiction writers to try to determine an alarm
system capable of being understood in the future. More or less naive or
absurd pictograms, iconograms, architecture for current storage
facilities with specific typologies, among other ideas, more or less
naive or absurd. New warehouses of this type are planned for the coming
decades. In Mexico, some waste is managed through the Patrader
Radioactive Waste Treatment Plant, located at the Nabor Carrillo Flores
Nuclear Center in the State of Mexico. There are other centers: the
Radioactive Waste Storage Center (Cader), the Radioactive Waste
Laboratory, La Piedrera, which stores rod contaminated with Co-60 and
the Peña Blanca area, where uranium tailings produced at the Villa
Aldama uranium plant were transferred. These 'nuclear graveyards' exist
in many countries for substances whose hazardousness will begin to
decline in 300 years or so. Yet the figures on this subject have such
large margins of error that it is almost absurd to bother to think about
them. Since the experience with this type of energy is not more than a
century old, all projections are illogical and worryingly approximate.
In recent news, the piling up of untreated polluting waste at the Laguna
Verde nuclear power plant was denounced. Compacted in black drums and
yellow bags, piled up, sometimes carried from one place to another, and
buried in warehouses, something comes and goes that will not degrade but
continues to accumulate.

# **The only remnant**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

We live in an age whose production processes have accelerated so much
that there is little point in talking about the duration of things,
because things simply no longer last, or last less and less. Duration
has become a concept with little or no meaning. Paradoxically, the times
of the most accelerated production and innovation are, at the same time,
the times of the longest lasting waste. For example, the 'half-life' of
cobalt-60 (i.e. the time it takes for its radioactivity to halve and
transform into another element) is 5.27 years, caesium-137 is 30 years,
and uranium-238 is 4.5 billion years. The biggest problem is that the
current repositories for nuclear waste serve only as temporary storage
facilities, since, in addition to the fact that their capacity is not
infinite, they cannot be considered as places that can guarantee a
totally safe safeguard to contain the risks posed by such waste
[@nz5otxengnp].[^1] When we think about the junk and waste that is
gradually taking over the world, it becomes very difficult not to be
attracted by Baudrillard's statement that 'our age no longer produces
ruins and vestiges, only waste and residues'
[@baudrillard_ilusion_2006]. How can we even speak of the 'ruins of
history' when all there is is debris (which only announces and confirms
the gradual emptying of historical experience)? One must note, however,
that Baudrillard's words conceal an important bias, which resonates with
Goethe. Goethe once wrote: 'America, you are better off than our
Continent, the Old. You possess neither ruined castles nor basalts.
Neither sterile remembrance nor useless strife disturbs your inner life
today' [@waldheim_ideologipolitica_1950]. For Goethe, America could not
have ruins, for it had no history. Baudrillard starts from a similar
assumption: the absence of ruins is the absence of history. The
difference between the two thinkers lies in the fact that, for Goethe,
the absence of ruins translated into the hope for a second beginning and
a new edifying project: that of a 'New World'. For Baudrillard, on the
other hand, the absence of ruins is rather the symptom of a hopeless
epoch that is built on voids incapable of evoking its history, and
instead only exposes the current banal state in which human edification
finds itself. Despite their difference, are not both perspectives
underwitten by a same monumentalised and monumentalising vision? It
seems that ruins can gonly be conceived of as the representation of what
was once a monument, while the debris is merely the waste left over from
man's edifying work. Indeed, Baudrillard situates 'ruins' as
ontologically opposed to waste and debris. Lacking in historical value,
scrap is the abject, the ugly, that which exposes our misery, that which
is not worth looking at, and, for that very reason, that which is best
hidden. And yet we must not lose sight of the fact that a ruin, after
all, is only a ruin in retrospect, that is, it is never a ruin in our
present, but will be a ruin with the passage of time (it *will be* when
it *has passed*). In this sense, debris is the only remnant, the only
one that resists and rebels against the obligatory demand for
acceleration of our times.

# **A (pandemic) time capsule**

by Xóchitl Arteaga Villamil

As if the events inherited from Chernobyl were not enough, we perform
these rewritings in convulsive times, mainly but not exclusively for
humanity, a year and a half into confinement: a privileged and
preventive measure in the face of a viral pandemic. Viruses are strange
beings and ancient inhabitants of the Earth. Strange because they have
surprising capacities to intertwine with all forms of life, to infect
them, and yet it cannot be said that they are living beings. Rather they
are remnants, fragments that deceive and sneak into the interior of
micro/organisms, causing a diversity of alterations in them. The
immensity and flexibility of viruses make them the most replicative and
abundant entities on the planet, the vast majority of which swim in
oceanic waters, making up 94% of all DNA contained in the seas. In turn,
some 1031 virions, i.e. the morphologically active and infectious
particles that bind to and invade all living beings, dance around the
world. These millions of reactive virions are made up of fragments of
some nucleic acid, plus layers of protective lipid molecules and some
(glyco)proteins that are the lure to invade host cells. Each virion
particle shares this biomolecular morphological pattern; if the fragment
is DNA it will be an adenovirus, such as human papillomavirus (HPV), and
if it is RNA it will be a retrovirus, such as tobacco mosaic virus,
SARS-CoV-2 or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). We are talking about
minute particles that collectively dance in and around micro/organisms,
as well as in a variety of ecosystems; beings that are reactive elements
and ancestral terrestrial inhabitants that have millenary experience of
adaptation to a myriad of circumstances.

> The \[rewritings\] do not betray the trauma, the stuckness of the
> drive that prompts us to freeze the instant and be scorched in its
> eternal present, the never-ending high noon of unregistered
> experience. But neither do they revel in the traumatic stoppage,
> deepened or prolonged**. **If you attend to them with care, with a
> gaze which is not that of a visual tourist, they might give you a clue
> to a difficult, existential riddle: 'How does one pass through what
> does not pass, does not become a past?' [@marder_chernobyl_2016]

Chernobyl is not in the past because the processes of decomposition of
matter were disrupted and with it the trophic networks that have been
lying next to radioactive waste since April 26, 1986. Without the
diversity of bugs and disintegrating creatures (archaea, bacteria,
nematodes, annelids, fungal mycelia, etc.), the soil's nutrient supply
is gradually depleted. In addition, under the radioactive influx, the
communities of micro/organisms that are part of and form the soil, i.e.
the creatures that carry out the flows of matter and energy in any
ecosystem, are unable to reincorporate organic plant matter, e.g. tree
trunks, causing them to undergo a certain process of temporary
suspension, an encapsulation that slows down or makes impossible the
continuity of their life and death processes. Communities of
microorganisms made up of viruses, archaea, bacteria, fungi and other
small eukaryotes thrive in many ecosystem patches. Particular
microbiomes emerge, for example, from the diverse communities of
creatures that inhabit our skin, eyelashes or intestines. Within this
diversity, the virome is the viral portion of the microbiome, where most
viruses infect bacteria (aka bacteriophages)
[@garcia-lopez_beyond_2019]. Despite the fact that viruses are composed
of particular biomolecules, fragments of DNA or RNA sheltered in
(glyco)protein capsids that can bind to the cells of our bodies, we say
that they are enigmatic companies because they share material bases with
all life forms, but are not regarded as something living. Viruses are an
enigmatic company because their genetic information comes to stay once
they have infected us. ... Between radiation and a virus is the eternal
lurking of the invisible.

# **We will be, as always, lost**

by Etelvina Bernal Méndez

'Who can imagine for even a second what it would have been like if the
three remaining reactors had exploded? The firefighters of that night
saved life itself. The time of life. Living time', Alexievich wrote.
Here I would like to quote Jacques Lacan, who responds to an interview
in 1974 for Panorama Magazine:

*What is the relationship between science and psychoanalysis today? For
me, the only true, serious science to follow is science fiction. The
other, official science, which raises its altars in laboratories,
advances blindly, without a goal. And it begins to fear even its own
shadow. It seems that scientists are reaching the moment of anguish. In
their aseptic laboratories, in their starched lab coats, these older
children playing with unknown things, making ever more complicated
apparatus and inventing ever more abstruse formulas, begin to wonder
about the future, about where this ever new research will lead. And what
if, I say, it is finally too late? Biologists are asking this question
now, or physicists, chemists. To me, they are crazy.*

*Only now, just as they are about to tear the universe apart, does it
occur to them to wonder if by chance that might be dangerous. What if
the bacteria so lovingly cultivated in the white laboratories were to
turn into deadly enemies? What if the world were swept away by a horde
of such bacteria, with all the stupidity that inhabits it, starting with
the scientists in the laboratories?*

*To Freud\'s three impossible positions - governing, educating,
psychoanalysing - I would add a fourth: that of science. Except that
scientists do not know that their position is untenable.*

*A rather pessimistic definition of what is called progress.*

* No, nothing like that. I am not a pessimist. Nothing will happen. For
the simple reason that man is useless, even incapable of destroying
himself. Personally I would find it wonderful if man were to produce a
total calamity. It would be proof that he has finally managed to do
something with his hands, with his head, without divine intervention,
natural or otherwise.*

*All those beautiful bacteria overfed for entertainment, spread around
the world like biblical locusts, would mean the triumph of man. But that
will never happen. Science is happily going through its crisis of
responsibility, everything will come back into the order of things, as
they say. I have announced it: the real will take the lead, as always.
And we will be, as always, lost *[@lacan_entrevista_1974].

# **Inside (outside)**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

Existing repositories for nuclear waste serve only as temporary storage
facilities, because, in addition to the fact that their capacity is not
infinite, they cannot guarantee to contain the risks posed by such
waste. That is why, for some years now, the construction of 'deep
geological repositories' has been undertaken in order to remove these
wastes from the unstable Earth's surface by burying and enclosing them
in the geological depths for thousands of years in order to minimise the
danger they pose. These constructions, if successful, would be a feat,
as they would finally realise the dream of erecting a building capable
of withstanding and even defeating the passage of time. However, the
realisation of this dream is nothing more than a utopia that only
reveals the biases of the times. One of the greatest challenges would be
to ensure that these constructions remained undisturbed and impervious
to all outside contact and events. How would it be possible to keep a
building -- even an underground one -- unalterable, as if whatever
happened around it did not affect it, as if it were not part of the
world of which it is in fact a part of? The Sarcophagus, the steel and
concrete structure that was built to cover the Chernobyl nuclear
reactor, was supposed to shelter and confine the dangerous radioactive
material inside, so that everything on the outside could feel safe.
However, its construction proved to be more of a desperate (and failed)
attempt to maintain a clear distinction between *inside* and *outside*
(and, in turn, to make it possible to control and manage the space).
What the Sarcophagus does is not actually neutralise the effects of
radiation, but simply hides them. Its construction is a staging of the
*inside-outside* that seeks to provide a (false) sense of security to
the viewer from the 'outside'. But the truth is that there is no
outside: we inhabit these residues, we are part of the Sarcophagus
[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. The confinement and concealment of our waste
does not mean its disappearance. We can neither see them nor remember
them, and yet they are there.

# **Earthlings for a while**

by Etelvina Bernal Méndez

I find a gesture of genuine transmission, if I may put it that way, in
the voices that Svetlana Alexievich brings us through her listening,
writing and editing. I also find an urgency of transmission about
Chernobyl and its consequences in *The Chernobyl Herbarium *by Michel
Marder and Anaïs Tondeur. In both cases, there is a refusal to serve as
a document for Science or for History. Yet, for whom are the prayers,
the voices, the reflective fragments, the chronicles of the future, the
samples of the invisible mark of radiation addressed? Are those books
\... for *us*, for *our* children? For consciousness? For the soul? For
human life? Are they a nod to the missing subject, to the divided
selves? For me, *The Chernobyl Herbarium* is the effect of a received
transmission that at the same time is relaunched, dispersed, and blown
to others. Not only the contaminating radionuclides are dispersed,
displaced, but also the voices, the plants, the reflective fragments of
Chernobyl, the words and the suspense reach us. How should we look at
them, receive them, and realise that something of unthinkable
proportions, has indeed happened? Neither as a witness nor as a victim,
but as a mere earthling passing through this world, I was a distant
recipient of Chernobyl at the age of six. I remember asking my father
around that time if he thought we would ever be so many people in the
world that we wouldn't have more than a square metre of space for each
other. He said yes, maybe, but he would probably be three metres below
the earth by then. Thus he informed me of two things: that someday he
would die, and that someday things on the planet might turn topsy-turvy.
He stated very clearly that there were tragedies and misfortunes, that
he would not witness them all *and* that he would not be there to
protect us in the future. My dad died 20 years and one day after the
Chernobyl explosion, on 27 April 2006, just before a wave of severe
flooding in Tabasco [@bernal_inundacion_2021], and long before the
COVID-19 pandemic. But I am no stranger to any of these events, because
I grew up with the awareness that something serious could happen
collectively at any moment. At any rate my dad seemed to know that dying
was necessary. What, in fact, could he care about Life? He was surprised
that his own father, at the age of 80-something, still cared enough to
go to the dentist. 89 years old at the time, he was a very old man still
concerned about the future of the world: he worried, for example, that
there would be a revolution in the wake of the contested 2006
presidential election. At the same time, he believed that it was fine to
bury rubbish, because that fertilised the soil. He didn't foresee the
current excess of plastics and packaging. ***I can see that the
difficulty of speaking led Marder to give voice to the plants, and
Svetlana to the survivors, and me to intervene in their words by
degrading, decomposing, dislocating and blurring the centre in order to
perhaps approach the truth as Bracha Ettinger does with the photographs,
to be able to work with them by blurring the images. To use another
register than that of erudition, but to give something to read, yes. To
look, to feel, to think. To dream***.

# **An atomic priesthood**

by Sandra Loyola Guízar

The way energy is produced today confronts us with the questions of how
to design urban-architectural projects at the temporal and spatial
scales of planetary catastrophe, how to isolate them from the curiosity
of humans or species that do not yet exist or how to convey the message
of danger.** **In 1982 the journal *Zeitschrift für Semiotik* issued a
survey that posed the following question: 'How would it be possible to
inform our descendants over the next 10,000 years about the storage
locations and dangers of radioactive waste?' Linguist Thomas Sebeok
proposed the creation of an atomic priesthood, thinking that the Church
and its belief system has been successfully handed down for almost two
thousand years. This priesthood would be dedicated to preserving
knowledge about the location and dangers of radioactive waste through
rituals and myths, and would indicate forbidden areas and consequences
for disobedience. Another proposal was made by Françoise Bastille and
Paulo Fabri, who proposed genetically intervening cats to significantly
change color when near radioactive material. They called this The Ray
Cat Solution.  Another idea was that of Vilmos Voigt: install warning
signs in many languages and, from time to time, add new signs with
translations, without removing the previous ones. The sign we use to
indicate the presence of nuclear radiation, the black clover, or rather,
the circle with three blades representing the three types of radiation:
alpha, beta and gamma, is more or less recent. It was invented in 1946
at the Radiation Department of the University of Berkeley. At the
beginning it had light blue and violet colors, then it was modified
because they considered that these were not associated with the danger
they wished to communicate. Then it became the current combination of
yellow with black, although in the emoticons of some of our cell phones
it is orange with white. This symbol may be familiar to us, but
according to surveys it seems that only 6% of the world's population
knows what it means. Efforts have been made to design a clearer symbol
to transmit the danger, even to settle them in the waste deposits
projected for this century. Currently, the shamrock has been taken up
again and a skull and a human silhouette running in a red triangle have
been added. However, there are discussions about the cultural variables
of the typology of the skull because there are countries that relate it
to themes unrelated to danger or to other ways of understanding death,
such as the repeated use in Mexico of skulls that are celebrated and
have their own festivity. The effects of nuclear energy and its waste
are universal, but the message that needs to be communicated faces
cultural heterogeneity and a planetary communication problem that, in
addition to the anthropocentric intention of designing a signal,
excludes the problem of animals and plants that also suffer the
consequences of radiation and who should be warned of the imminent
danger. Storing nuclear waste confronts us with the present and future
human otherness, but also, and absolutely not disputed, with non-human
otherness, because so far it is not evident how vital it is to be able
to communicate in the present (and in the future) between species.

# **Acociles**

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

I walk downstream until I come upon the huge *amate* trees that have
guarded La Mora (a waterspring) for thousands of years. I choose this
place to take some pictures because I love the green carpet made of
creepers, fig trees, and countless plants. The union of the waterspring
with the river provides enough nutrients for the exponential growth of
vegetal life. This includes the watercress, an aquatic plant that was
cultivated in Cuautla for the first time just 75 years ago, and then
taken to various sections of the Cuautla river where artisanal dams were
built. The watercress became food for the aquatic fauna, especially for
the *acociles* (*Cambarellus montezumae*), an endemic type of
crustacean, usually small and gray in color. Decades ago, when its
population was still visible in the waters of the river, *acociles*
prevented the watercress from becoming a pest that could cover dozens of
meters in just weeks. At that time there was a large number of birds,
eagles, herons, some owls, and small birds of various types and colors
that made the vegetation on the banks of the habitat, feeding largely on
the *acociles* that were then enough food to promote an ecosystem. Some
watercress growers harvest the mature plant and make packages
immediately to distribute them commercially; others are responsible for
taking care of the growth of young plants. For this they pour various
chemical components between the dams, and spray as many on the foliage
of the plant. The purpose, they explain, is to kill the pests that
threaten their growth. They say that, from the first shoots, some
organisms such as insects and crustaceans, among them *acociles,
*threaten their existence and their ideal (commercial) size. Their
efforts to eliminate the crustaceans has led to their de facto
extinction. In addition the chemicals dumped in the river have also
other aquatic species, drastically reducing the bird population in the
region. Without *acociles* the river has been left without natural
regulation to the growth of watercress, which has now become a kind of
weed accumulated in large quantities that even reduce the flow of the
river, affecting the irrigation of hundreds of hectares of the lower
zone of Cuautla. For this reason, the Asociación de Usuarios del Río
Cuautla, Manantiales y Corrientes, Tributarias General Eufemio Zapata
Salazar A.C. (ASURCO) has proposed for several years to destroy
watercress plantations. From the near extinction of the *acociles* among
many other species, to the social conflicts over water, we only gather
that Man satisfies his needs and desires by destroying whatever He
assumes to be his environment. A destructive-extractive behavior that
is, in the end, symptomatic of 'the (male) reduction of the world' to a
sense of ownership, the world reduced to a 'for us'.

# Hopelchén, the place and the flood {#hopelchn-the-place-and-the-flood}

by Yareni Monteón

Hopelchén means 'five wells'. In the Yucatán Peninsula almost all fresh
water is underground. For people there, poisoning the earth necessarily
means poisoning the water. 2020, in addition to being going through the
Covid-19 pandemic, my territory suffered other ravages of climate
change: it was a summer of violent rains that caused floods that
affected Hopelchén above all. My Maya teacher is originally from that
municipality, so when I found out about the incident I contacted her to
ask about her family. She told me that her town did not have such a bad
time, because being a valley in which the geography has not been
modified for intensive cultivation, it still has natural drains. Those
who did not do so well were Mennonite neighbors who till the land with
Monsanto-brand industrial products. Its vast farmlands were flooded.
Countless mutant plant beings were drowned and much of their
agricultural machinery was also irreparably damaged due to the fury of
Yuntziloob Ixchel.

# **The tongues of water**

by Nidia Rosales Moreno

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/trw7swor/41642689586666.JPG){#nj2f3pekgf0}

2019 was the year designated by the UN as the International Year of
Indigenous Languages. Yásnaya Aguilar Gil gave a speech in her native
tongue *Ayuujk/Mixe* on that year to the Mexican Chamber of Deputies
that was titled 'Mexico. Water and the word. Mexico and its many hidden
names'. She started by asking the question: why are languages dying? Why
will half of the world\'s linguistic diversity disappear within 100
years [@np12egpx666])? One of her answers is that the disappearance of
languages does not happen naturally, as a consequence of a historical
process or of changes that occur by themselves, but is due to the
violence of the Mexican state, and of states in general, which have
exercised their power to erase linguistic diversity. Where might we look
to get out of this mess and the environmental catastrophe that is
looming or is already here and we have not fully recognised it? I am
interested in the possibility of caring for biodiversity through
language, because to put an end to languages is to put an end to other
senses of the world that unfold from there. In Mexico, we are taught at
school from an early age that water is a resource, something we can use,
waste, consume, because it is our absolute right. This thinking has
implications in an ontological sense; it designates a particular
perspective that understands the environment as a series of replaceable
and paradoxically infinite objects. If this is somehow reflected in
languages, I wonder if some of the ideas I grew up with and which belong
to a Zapotec heritage according to which hills, lightning and water are
animated or have agency, offer a slightly more holistic view among the
beings we coexist with. The reality is that I don't know, and I am not
interested in participating in a perspective that turns native
experiences into folklore or exoticism. Could we, however, recognise
that other ways of thinking about plants, about life, have been here for
a long time? Could we learn from those experiences? What I can say is
that there would be a change of outlook if, as has happened in
Australia, Canada and New Zealand, animals, plants, mountains and bodies
of water were given legal personality. Or as if, in Ayutla, before the
2017 conflict, water was protected by a series of community practices
that establish different degrees of responsibility and reciprocity
towards resources and life.

# **Cycad-worlds**

by Carolina Cuevas

What does it mean to care for a mountain in the light of the
deterioration of the health of the people who live there, of the loss of
plant worlds due to anthropogenic activities, of the slow death of the
water bodies of a whole region? What does it mean to think about
water-body-territory in relation to the environmental racism that
structures the processes of death and life in the
region?^\ ^[@zaragocin_espacios_2018] Can we even imagine a
non-appropriative relationship with our environment? The rewriting of
the herbarium attempts to be the inscription of
*being-in-common*^***\ ***^[@garza_muertos_2021]; a form, even if
unfinished, with which we explore the extension of writing, that is to
say, its material involvements, that is to say, to explore with which
organisms writing is always already intertwined. When we meet to rewrite
the herbarium, someone says that plants were denied their souls so that
they could be mistreated. I write it down in my notebook next to the
list of plant species of the region: willows, fig trees, *guácimas*,
*guanacastes*, cycads, palms, ferns, holm oaks. All these forms of plant
life make up this mountain in whose entrails the most elemental
ecological reality germinates: relations are what makes life possible.
Marder suggests that these plants have a world (or perhaps worlds) of
their own, only if in this 'having' we can discern the nuances of a
non-appropriative relationship with the environment in which, with
which, plant beings grow^\ ^[@marder_plant-thinking_2013]. We recognise
that the plant worlds, the nuclear catastrophe, the ecocide exceed our
powers of representation, and yet, knowing that plants extend between
the folds of the mountain, that leaf litter regenerates the soil and
that sunlight rearranges and transforms the plant tissues, we still
think about care of the plant worlds that inhabit and make these
territories. Vegetal intelligence spreads without leaving the place
wherein their existence is embedded^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. Vegetal
care, in this diseased environment, is learning from the amphibious life
of plants: to attend to the changes in the living conditions of the
earth and to deploy adaptive mechanisms to prolong an embedded
existence.

# **A community response**

by Nidia Rosales Moreno

Jaime Martínez Luna, an anthropologist from Guelatao de Juárez, together
with Floriberto Díaz has developed the term 'communality' from the
Sierra Norte de Oaxaca. According to Elena Nava Morales, communality
'points to the importance of the daily practices and actions of the
inhabitants of the Sierra Norte of Oaxaca, making it a category in
movement, a vivid category in constant transformation'
[@nava_morales_ecos_2020]. Likewise, in this indigenous form of
organisation the assembly is essential, as is the *tequio*, a common
practice in schools, institutions, neighbourhoods and even in the
streets, which extends to other regions of the state. The fiesta is one
of the aims of community organisation; it brings together work,
reciprocity, common action that leads to moments of enjoyment; it is in
some way the product of the time invested in work: 'The festival is an
integral result, both of the creativity that emerges from work, from
movement, from production, and of nature that provides the necessary
materials, and the organisation that strengthens the results, which are
embodied in the enjoyment of all kinds of society'
[@martinez_luna_comunalidad_2017]. Resistance can be a battle, as it is
for those who, from different fronts, risk their bodies and lives to
protect their territories from mining companies, logging industries,
transnationals that dry up their aquifers, the illegal sale of communal
lands and the depredation of animals in general, as in the case of a
large number of indigenous communities and individuals who have even
been murdered. It is also for intellectuals and activists such as
Yásnaya Aguilar Gil or the linguists who are members of COLMIX, who work
to continue speaking their language and stand, as in the case of
Yásnaya, in front of the Congress of the Union, demanding it in the
language of [their
grandmothers](https://www.revistadelauniversidad.mx/articles/1157b614-c696-4872-9b14-c48b1c8680b5/mujeres-indigenas-fiesta-y-participacion-politica "null").
However, resistance also takes place in community moments such as
fiestas, both in disagreements and in the moments when we can assume
ourselves as a collective and where, paradoxically, our voice becomes
plural.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/j84srxlh/21642689626646.JPG){#np540r4kh0d}

# **Ecomimesis**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

In the age of the Anthropocene, history can no longer ignore the
intimate relationship between history and nature, let alone continue to
defend their opposition. The hierarchical division between the *natural
world* and the *historical world* has become untenable. The very
structure of testimony has been transmuted precisely because of those
events that finally challenged the imaginary line between the two
worlds, to the point of breaking it down. In this sense, Marder argues
that plants pose a challenge to metaphysics in Pripyat, for they are
quintessentially changing beings that transform the places in which they
grow [@marder_chernobyl_2016]. The *encounter* between historical time
and natural time has not been so evident until now - the ruins, together
with the vegetation growing in their crevices, bearing witness to this
encounter. Neither history nor testimony are any longer figures that
belong exclusively to subjects with the consciousness and control to say
what happened. The 'natural world' has also become a historical
testimony. Overcoming and even surpassing the capacities of
consciousness itself, the encounter between plant time and historical
time exposes a type of testimony that, rather than telling (in the sense
of λóγος -- logos -- which, since Aristotle, had been reserved only for
the human species and, specifically, for free men), shows and evidences
an *ecomimetic *relationship and movement between geology and history.
History is no longer exclusively human, or at least it can no longer
appear to be so (for perhaps it never was); history has geological
marks. Human or not, bodies are the product and effects that reflect and
bear witness to this encounter.

# **Roots**

by Carolina Cuevas

Exposed to a weakened vital substrate, cycads still extend their bodies
slowly and steadily, just a few millimetres each year, and from that
calm growth, from their apparent immobility, they reach up to 2000 years
of life. The question of the ecophysiological aspects that have favoured
the survival of *Dioon edule *cycads on steep slopes and rocky
environments with scarce water and nutrients is also the question of the
material record of what a living being has endured in its
lifetime^\ ^[@marder_plant-thinking_2013]. Cycads survive, and remember
how they have done it, there, where their acephalous sensitivity seems
to offer a solution to the enigma of survival. We wonder where the
imprint, the mark of such bodily learning, remains after living embedded
in an environment that barely sustains them. To write that a plant
organism has a memory is to say that it has a past -- of grievances and
hostility, for example -- which it bears witness to through its physical
extension. The cycads' memory of survival, another form of accumulated
temporality, is harboured and extended, above all, through their roots.
There, in that moist, fibrous region, the links that make their
longevity possible are woven: a deep root that anchors them to the
nourishment of the soil and a coral-like root system that grows upwards
along the surface. These coralloid roots are the physical site of
symbiotic processes between blue-green algae, mycorrhizal fungi, and the
cycads. The roots of the cycads become the vital territory of algae,
which obtain carbohydrates in exchange for fixing nitrogen for the
cycads, and of fungi that facilitate the absorption of water and
nutrients from the soil. A wealth of symbiotic memory: the record of an
intimate association that makes it possible for life to cling to just a
fistful of land. Within the coraloid roots an ancestral pact between
soil, plant, water, fungi, algae, and sun is recorded. A root structure
that is a pact between entities that organised themselves to survive in
times of catastrophe, of scarcity, of threatened sustenance. But also,
in the community of cycads that lives on this mountain in Veracruz, we
are witnessing a rupture.

# **Becoming strange**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

The world is becoming stranger and stranger, or is it 'us' who keep
getting stranger in and to the world? By the time we hear of an event,
it has already happened, and we can only watch it from a distance,
following the trail it left in its wake. In Ciudad Juárez, no one was
aware of what was happening, of how, along with the van, the radiation
was spreading imperceptibly through the city and had even crossed state
and national borders. It remained that way for at least a month until
the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico detected and warned
about a moving radioactive source nearby. By that time, the radioactive
material had already been converted into building material and was being
distributed. Despite efforts by the Mexican and US governments to
collect it, an estimated 1,000 tonnes of radioactive rods were never
recovered. Fortunately, it was easier to locate the van that originally
transported the medical unit to the scrap yard. Parked in the middle of
a public road, in a residential area, where people were passing by or
gathering and children were playing, the van was giving off high doses
of radioactivity. In fact, the few cobalt-60 granules that remained
after the vehicle had been driven through several areas of the city were
found on the bed of the vehicle. All the contaminated objects, including
the van, were taken to a radioactive cemetery [@brooks_como_2020]. The
question remains, however: where did the rest of the radioactive
material and waste end up? What happened to those tiny but potent
pellets of cobalt-60 that were scattered across Ciudad Juárez and all of
México? What houses or buildings were erected with the tons of rods that
could not be found? Although it was too late for panic to break out
among the Mexican population as it did in Brazil, the fate of all this
nuclear waste (and even the waste that continues to be produced)
continues to arouse an uncanny mood to this day.

# **Apocalypse, the scene and the word **

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

Apocalypse has long been televised and commercialised by Hollywood as a
synonym of spectacular destruction. Almost always destruction appears
within an epic narrative of war, as the result of a struggle of good
against evil (*Terminator,* 1984; *Mad Max*, 1979; *12 Monkeys*, 1995).
Some films present civil war as an outcome of the fall of the State in
its function as guarantor of security, as happens in the imaginary
Zombies (*I am Legend*, 2007), and thereby exalt the need to enter a
state of exception, where some sovereign can rule with an iron fist to
preserve order. Others present a natural disaster as the only thing
capable of stopping and, paradoxically, destroying the logic of
annihilation that capitalism has become. In its destructive version,
nature appears as the only possibility of a new beginning (*Earthquake*,
1974; *The Day After Tomorrow*, 2004; *Geostorm*, 2017; *Don\'t Look
Up*, 2021). Last but not least, some others frame the debacle of
humanity through rapidly spreading incurable diseases, which seemed to
turn real with the pandemic caused by COVID-19 (*The Andromeda Menace*,
1971; *Children of Men*, 2006; *The Crazies*, 2010; *Contagion*, 2011).
... We need to remember, however, that Apocalypse in itself is not just
a scene of great destruction. In Biblical texts it works as a genre that
seeks to transmit the word of what is to come and urges to make a
responsible decision. It is, undoubtedly, a genre marked by the search
for justice, rather than by the mere pleasure of viewing catastrophic
spectacles. At any rate, we know that at present it is more plausible to
imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism ... the problem
of the permanent crisis, distended towards a telos in linear time, where
everything that exists must be placed at the service of the human. This
is precisely the problem that Hollywood's apocalyptic imaginary does not
solve and that, by contrast, Biblical apocalypse can help us to think in
an alternative way. The image presented by Hollywood must be set aside
in order to give way to a broader understanding of what destruction
might mean. ... In the apocalyptic tradition, as found in the New
Testament and in other ancient non-biblical texts, is the announcement
that a longstanding way of thinking and understanding has come to an
end, has ceased to make sense. An apocalypse can, in turn, rescue that
which had been despised and place it in a new chain of relationships, in
a new reality organised by different constraints. The characteristic of
the apocalyptic is that it introduces the possibility of rupture, in the
creative sense of a new reality constructed from elements that existed
but were reduced to their minimum expression. Many worlds ended when
technical development was used for exploitation, and many worlds end
when the logic of exploitation loses its capacity to persuade, paving
the way to the emergence of a new relationship with the world in general
and with the former waste of humanity: rivers and plants.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/d3nqria2/41668953425055.jpeg){#njihkyxvjje}

# **Vegetal life, or the future that never was**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

> What is ruined is ruined by the 'passing of time'. But what is this
> something ruined, something, what? Something that was never entirely
> visible; the ruin keeps the trace of something that, even when the
> building was intact, did not appear in its fullness*
> *[@zambrano_hombre_2020]

On a closer reading of Zambrano, we can see that, while ruins imply the
division of worlds, they are at the same time evidence of their
indiscernibility. The ruins, insofar as they represent the encounter
between *life-death and dejection-edification*, become the ontological
site par excellence that questions and deconstructs the separation
between the human and natural worlds. In them, the boundaries are
blurred and confused. It is no longer clear where each of the realms
begins and ends. It is no coincidence that Zambrano points to the
vegetal as a necessary condition of the ruins. Faced with the question
*are ruins a natural product or, rather, a product of human activity*?
her answer is that they are neither, and instead, that *there is no ruin
without plant life*. But what does this mean in historical terms? It is
perhaps simpler to pose the question in reverse: what would ruins be if
they were thought of in isolation from plant life? Zambrano goes so far
as to warn that '\[t\]he neatly preserved ruin, isolated from life,
acquires a monstrous character; it has lost all its significance and
only shows neglect or worse' [@zambrano_hombre_2020]. If she had
previously identified ruins as the object par excellence for thinking
about history, it is precisely because she recognised in them the traces
of something that *was *and that was defeated by time but that, at the
same time, survived time as that which did *not come to be*. In other
words, the ruins would be that privileged object for history because it
is through them that 'the perspective of time appears before us'
[@zambrano_hombre_2020]. In the ruins, a series of temporalities is
articulated that is not restricted only to the linear triad of
past-present-future, but also gives form and substance to time itself
(*the past that never ceases to pass, the future that never was, the
present that is a promise, but also a memory*, and yet another series of
conjugations that remain to be thought of). In short, the ruins are the
opening of temporal horizons, for what they reveal is not only the
passage of time but time itself. What is monstrous, in this sense, is
the alienation of the ruin from the world from which, in the first
place, it emerged as an expression of the life that inhabits it, and
which, ultimately, constitutes it. Its isolation and its preservation
would therefore mean the closure of its horizons and its vital
suspension.

# **Agony**

by Carolina Cuevas

In the aftermath of Hurricane Ernesto, a sturdy community of chamal
cycads in El Farallón collapsed as the sand softened of the dunes where
they stood. Uprooted and decimated, some organisms were displaced to the
gardens of the Laguna Verde Nuclear Power Plant. Thereafter, researchers
from the National Institute of Ecology observed a deterioration in the
community health of the plants: barely a few adults survived, no young
plants, no seeds, no cones, no pollinators. *The network of interactions
had been broken *[@gonzalez-astorga_dioon_nodate]. In April this year,
the Farallón lagoon, the closest body of water to the Laguna Verde
nuclear power plant in Veracruz, saw its water level drop from as much
as 13 metres to just 15 centimetres deep. In some areas, the
disappearance of water has left behind dry, broken pieces of land.
Fishermen in the area speak of climate change, overexploitation by
cattle ranches, and water extraction for mining exploration. *We are
living a catastrophe*, some say. *Our* *mountains are wounded. Very
wounded. Springs that never dried up in El Porvenir are dry. Hopelessly
dry. \... The Farallón lagoon is running dry, in agony, *say others.
There is a mountain where prospecting work for a mine began thirty years
ago, and there is, in the same region, a few kilometres away from a
nuclear power plant, a dying lagoon, a pelican stuck in between the
cracks, a community of fishermen digging, looks for water for their
***mojarras***.

# **AZ-5**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

In recent times, the Pripyat area has become a landmark for 'nuclear
tourism'. There, one can find everything from spectators seeking to
satiate their curiosity with a front-row view of a post-apocalyptic
scenario to sobering tours instructing us about the scope and the risks
of nuclear technology. While surfing the internet, it is not uncommon to
come across those who promote the now iconic frozen Ferris wheel as a
favourite place to take a souvenir photo, as well as those who offer the
possibility of renting a dosimeter that 'will become another organ of
your senses' so that you do not miss the opportunity to perceive the
invisible radioactive landscape. Now that Chernobyl has been declared an
'official tourist attraction', permission has even been given to visit
some areas of reactor 4 [@n3bxvl6igta]. Knowing this, some companies
offer the opportunity to press the AZ-5 button in the control room (the
button that, it seems, triggered the 1986 explosion). The
*museification* of the world, perhaps best represented in Chernobyl
(though not only), thus achieves its victory over history, which it
conquers by overriding it, creating a knot in time (which is, at the
same time, a knot between life and death). What the tour companies
exhibit is not only the attitude of those who fetishise disaster, but
they are the very proof of a reifying vision of history (inseparable, by
the way, from the humanist figure of the author). Undoubtedly, this has
become an exemplary scenario for understanding how the paradigm of
nuclear science and technology provided the necessary conditions for the
human being to be considered not only as the craftsman of the products
he manufactured, but also as a being capable of initiating processes in
the world (both natural and historical). Beyond the instrumental
relationship that the human has long maintained with his environment, he
has discovered himself to be sufficiently powerful to exert an influence
on his own milieu and, to that extent, to be able to direct and
administer it. In this sense, the sobering speeches accompanying and
adorning the guided tours, which focus on raising awareness and
preventing the catastrophe from happening again (which, moreover, have
been shown to be ineffective) actually conceal a much more conceited
meaning than it appears. 'Man made this' is the accusation that always
echoes in the background of nuclear tourism offers. But it is not clear
whether this accusation does indeed point to the perpetrator of the
crimes or, rather, seeks to name the author of history; it is no longer
clear whether what is presented here is a denunciation of the crime or
an ode to the criminal.

# **2021** {#2021}

by Carolina Cuevas

We drive back along the coastal road. In April last year, on this same
road that leads to La Mancha, Adán Vélez Lira, a defender of this land
and opponent of the mine, was murdered. When I was a child, getting to
my grandparents\' house in Boca de Ovejas meant skirting the hills and
lagoons on a narrow road that went all the way to Poza Rica. Now, in its
place, there is a highway all the way to Laguna Verde. We stop to look
at the dried-up lagoon and the highway which seems to float above a kind
of desert. Not far away, we can see the mountains where the mine is
located. I try to imagine the perimeters that delimit the extent of the
impacts of these projects. Like the radioactive fallout, the concrete,
the toxic runoff, the water extraction, the murder of environmental
defenders, invalidate our preconceived notions of causality and
responsibility. I try to imagine, like a drift of suddenly visible
radioactive particles, the drift of extractivism along a spatio-temporal
line that is impossible for me to trace: moving through the phreatic
surface, dispersing between streams and waterholes, tearing muscles and
tissues, swirling in ever-longer periods of low water. The exact source,
the origin, is never clear. Nor are the trajectories of the spread: it
brushes and fractures our skin, the earth and its layers, the plants,
their roots and leaves [@marder_chernobyl_2016].^\ ^Marder asks what we
are capable of understanding after the explosion of consciousness that
is Chernobyl^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. The dispersion of radioactive
fallout in Chernobyl affected the earth and its ecology, people, their
health, institutions, moral precepts,
culture^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. By posing the same question in the
coastal region of Veracruz, where the nuclear catastrophe remains a
threat and the mine unleashes a gradual explosion, its terms are
reconfigured: What worlds, even if muted, are we able to hear? Who
notices, who perceives, in whom can we find life? At a protest against
the mine in Xalapa, I can barely distinguish the cardboard carried by
two girls holding hands: *Yes to life, no to the mine*! And underneath,
there is the drawing of a fish swimming between the cracks of a dried
river. On the shore, a tree, a plant world of unfathomable vulnerability
looks saddened.

# **Insistence or \... we need new books** {#insistence-or-we-need-new-books}

by Etelvina Bernal Méndez

'We need new books more than ever, because all around us a new life is
being born' says a rural teacher's voice. The images by Anaïs Tondeur in
*The Chernobyl Herbarium* reveal an unknown existence. They show the
insistence of life, in spite of everything. Consciousness, on the other
hand, does not always persist. The will to know may even get in the way.
A lot of knowledge sometimes reveals nothing. The silent concert of
plants reveals to us the beauty and monstrosity of an inheritance, the
legacy to which we wake up as if surprised to recognise ourselves in the
photograph of someone who does not see us with his eyes. A negative
development. On the path of vital development, more than in the lights
of consciousness, the unconscious operates as a factory of fine fabrics:
an incessant producing machine of compositions, editions, mixtures ... .
A multiplicity of possibilities. Hodgepodge. Not arbitrary. Above and
below, on the surface and in the depths, there is nothing seemingly
unrelated and without consequences in space-time. The testimony of the
stills graciously indicates that wisdom, at least that of plants, even
in a zone of devastation, is not known, it is simply lived. Where does
the search, the insistence of life in plants go? How do they behave,
interpreting their environment in order to grow and live? The
interpretation of the plants is testimony to their relationship with the
other, the environment, the milieu, the habitat, their home. Their
relationship with their environment, their necessary link, never
suspended. They react to what is there, they relate to it, and not to
something else, not to a hereafter. They simply respond to it, to what
is there: be it fertiliser or poison, be it propitious or the opposite.
They live or die, they adapt, fork, twist, change, modify their path,
seek the necessary moisture, seek to insist, to overcome. They do not
take death for granted in the face of catastrophe, nor do they so easily
concede their return to the land from which they have always departed
towards the sun in search of warmth. We need each other in our mutual
differences. Our human life depends on them, our differences and
similarities between plants, other animals, the earth, the water, the
sun, the air \... all these differences are truths so clear, so evident,
so certain, that perversion has only been able to take place in the
invisibility of this interdependence, in its denial. There is a
knowledge of the continuity between one and the other that is
necessarily produced in the experience of the encounter with the world.
World and life. We need each other, we depend on each other, we are
subjects. Not only to nature, but also to representation, and to the
signifier and to what, in spite of everything, cannot be said, the
truth. We are finite but we are born indebted to a past and we must give
way, pass and tribute to the future. We are beings of passage.

# **Re-writing the Herbarium from Oaxaca**

by Nidia Rosales Moreno

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/yy2jedem/41642689647889.JPG){#nmoiivtq3ip}

In the process of re-writing, many voices intervene. Re-writing aims to
dilute individual authorship as a whole, to question the notion that
what we say, write or do has arisen only as a consequence of a solitary
process. *In Los muertos indóciles: necroescrituras y desapropiación*,
the writer Cristina Rivera Garza describes some mechanisms to make it
evident that the notion of authorship has other possibilities of being,
and that in writing, we are writing with many hands.I think the way in
which the *Herbarium* is articulated relates different layers of the
same reality, even different temporalities, materialities and
imaginations. Memory is something similar. Re-writing this text from
Oaxaca means thinking about it in a specific context, in a territory
that has particular problems but also offers a series of responses that
in this case are stated from a community perspective. When I began to
think about how I could write a *Herbarium* in Oaxaca, and following
Gabriela Méndez Cota's proposal, I made a list of the quelites that were
part of my diet and that are in the traditional dishes of that region.
Thinking about these dishes made me remember my grandmothers,
remembering the recipes and the moments I shared with them, made me
imagine how these small plants grow intertwined in the crops, dependent
on them, on the sun, the rain and the lightning, and at the same time
autonomous. Language and food are maternal transmissions; it is women
who communicate in different ways what they know and feel about the
world. In 'Mujeres indígenas, fiesta y participación política,' Yásnaya
Aguilar highlights the role of women in the community organisation of
Ayutla, from the kitchen to the management of the fiesta and public
posts. For her, the hearth is an affective centre for the transmission
of knowledge, participation and social amalgamation. It is in this fire,
through foods such as quelites and plants in general, that the network
that we inhabit becomes evident, the set of elements that make us belong
to the land, live off it, accompany us and enjoy time as a community of
plants [@aguilar_gil_mujeres_2019].

# **Cycads show the way**^\ ^[@marder_chernobyl_2016] {#cycads-show-the-way}

by Carolina Cuevas

> I see the world around me with different eyes. A small ant crawls on
> the ground and is now closer to me. A bird soars in the sky and is
> closer to me. The distance between me and them has shrunk. There is no
> longer an abyss between us. Everything is
> life^\ ^[@alexievich_voces_2019]

From the road we can see a portion of the mine and Laguna Verde through
its territorial impacts on the system of mountains and sister lagoons
along the coast. We can imagine that rain falls over the dunes and
mangroves and infiltrates the surface until it is incorporated into each
water-body-territory. We can distinguish a glow in each organism and
piece of land affected by the drift of extractivism: the uncontainable
gleam of the nuclear plant: the uncontainable explosion of the mine. But
the way of thinking that separates organism and environment, that sees,
here, an isolated cycad, even a disposable one, does not fully
understand its extent. The cycads bear witness to the difficulty of
containing a gradual outburst from their mountainous enclosure. Muted up
there, the oldest organisms have been entangled for more than 2000 years
to a mountain which in turn is entangled to the lagoons downstream:
their intelligence consists entwining themselves to that which shelters
them. What, then, is there of the plant in us, in the ***aguaje***, in
the lagoon, in Doña Rosario, in Adán? Can we become a plant in order to
extend an intelligence that knows how to entwine itself to its
environment after centuries of deploying our intelligence as domination?
Our rewriting of Marder and Tondeur's herbarium attempts to be the
non-appropiative inscription of
*being-in-common*^***\ ***^[@garza_muertos_2021]**:** a form, even if
unfinished, with which we explore the extension of writing, that is to
say, its material involvements, that is to say, to explore with which
organisms writing is always already intertwined. We intend that the
rewriting of these fragments will help us to think, through the body of
the plants, of a catastrophe which, in its etymological sense, is an
irruption [@{marder_tondeur_anaïs_2016}]. On this coast, the history of
a catastrophe which, we know, precedes Laguna Verde by centuries, has
been inscribed as a kind of geology of irruptions. In *Voices from
Chernobyl*, Svetlana Alexievich recounts the story of a beekeeper who
hears the absence of bees as the sign of an event in progress, of a
monster that is about to overtake him: *The bees had noticed it, but we
hadn\'t. Now, if I notice something strange, I will pay attention to
them. In them we can find life *[@alexievich_voces_2019]*.*^***\ ***^I
think of the community of cycads as the plant testimony of the
conditions of possibility for life to germinate or to decay, that is, as
a witness to a catastrophe that is difficult to name, requires sitting
down to listen to what the environment, the very physicality of the
world, registers: a communal task: writing among/for the dead: writing
among/for the living: a matter of being-with-others
[@garza_muertos_2021].

# **Recovering our senses and a sense... of extinction**

by Sandra Hernández Reyes

The apocalyptic model can also be used to think about what happened in
the Cuautla River, which the inhabitants, enchanted by the dream of
progress, assume to be an inexhaustible source of water, one that does
not need to be cared for. ... We can see that Chernobyl and the Cuautla
River are both mediated by an epistemology of exploitation that reveals
the world in the same devastating ways. ... Unlike Hollywood, the river
shows us that there is no growth without decadence and there is no such
thing as infinite growth. They do not suppress or repress decadence and,
instead, they help us to think otherwise about our own decay. Could we
ask ourselves about life beyond human life, beyond the concern for
salvation? Following Claire Colebrook, should we be asking ourselves
whether human survival would also 'save the mechanisms that have brought
the human species and its environment to the brink of destruction?'
[@colebrook_extincion_2019]. If, in trying to save ourselves from
extinction, we are merely reproducing the biopolitics that destroys our
freedom, is it the same to establish a new vegetal parameter that
functions to justify a partition with an originary character between
life that is worth living (Bios) and that which is sacrificial and
disposable (Zoe).[^2] Perhaps, in the concern for the exemplary life of
plants, we may give rise to a *regula vitae* that does not destroy the
logic of the dominant capitalism of accumulation and consumption,
because it would simply be making it up, transferring it to an external
law with which we fantasise about being able to extend our existence. In
this way we would have achieved voluntary servitude to that *regula
vitae*, still fascinated with the dream of eternal youth and the
inexhaustible reproduction of vegetable life, as the most sustainable
version of the disposable and infinite consumption. This is the question
in which we find ourselves, where we are placed before the vertigo
generated by the possibility of our extinction.

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/8ix6b54f/11668953474555.jpeg){#nt80ly1k9ic}

# **The inside of the inside**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

If architecture and history maintained a close relationship for María
Zambrano, it is because both shared the same task: building, whose main
purpose was to cover the *need* of human beings to construct a milieu
that was habitable for them and that would protect them (thus
compensating for their deficiency as the only maladapted being in the
world). But, in addition to fulfilling this utilitarian function,
architecture and history were also --according to the philosopher -- the
means by which human beings ultimately expressed their longing to find
an interior that would not only shelter them, but also remove them from
the exterior and give birth to their dreams (thus freeing them from the
imposing weight of reality) [@zambrano_islas_2007]. However, it is
experience itself that has ended up refuting Zambrano's thesis. If
anything is clear, it is that, nowadays, inhabiting is irremediably
accompanied by the experience of estrangement and a generalised
sensation of imminent danger that warns of the continuous presence of
different threats -- visible or invisible -- that lie in wait (or how
else could we describe the experiences lived after the various nuclear
disasters, the depletion and struggle for natural resources, global
warming, the environmental crisis and, we might even add, the current
pandemic of COVID-19? ). The Mexican case is, in this sense, a scenario
that represents it in a radical way. What do these radioactive houses
tell us about this interior and this need and longing to build that
architecture and history share? In 'Política sin oxígeno', the third
part of Julieta Aranda\'s trilogy *Rescatando mi propio cadáver*, there
is an image with which the artist forces us to a provocative reflection
on the *interior* and on *life.* It is about a snail that in its
interior harbours a parasite that is consuming it, bringing it to the
brink of its death. The image is accompanied by the following lines:
'What is inside an animal that is controlled by another animal? Life'
[@aranda_rescatando_2018]. When we think of radioactive houses, it is
inevitable that the answer to the question posed by Aranda takes on more
ominous dimensions. It is no longer a question of one life inhabiting
another, but the opposite: a life inhabiting the interior of its death.
Today, history and architecture (one as a reflection of the other) have
built a subjectivity that harbours within itself the sum of violence
from which its constructions are now erected and from which the
conditions of its own self-destruction originate. To refer once again to
the work of the Mexican artist Julieta Aranda, it is curious to realise
that the era of nuclear science and the yearning to find the Higgs boson
(the particle that, according to the *Standard Model of particles*,
would serve to finally explain the origin of mass and, therefore, of
matter) is, at the same time, the era that intentionally generates its
own emptiness: We burned corpses to keep the world turning. And it
actually worked very well. The corpse energy made everything go faster.
Life went faster, the problem is that death also became faster. We were
digging holes all over the place, digging up corpses and leaving them
empty. Digging up corpses was good business \... But in the process, we
too became corpses ... Meanwhile, under the surface ... We want to know
what's inside. Inside what? Inside the holes, before we made them.
What\'s left in the space the corpse used to occupy? And so we keep
digging, to look for the inside of the inside, constantly getting lost
along the way.

# **Impossible answer to a letter from the future**

by Etelvina Bernal Méndez

Dad, do you think that one day there will be so many people on the
planet that we won\'t have more than a square metre of space for each
other?

Yes, but by then I\'ll be ten feet under \...

Dad, do you think the end of the world is too terrible?

The end of the world is when one dies ... On the other hand, I do not
agree that sinners who repented at the last moment should be redeemed.
It does not seem fair to me.

Dad, what is death?

\... is the continuity of life. It is a cycle. We have to die to
fertilise the soil that will grow the new plants that will sustain the
livestock that will feed future generations, who will also die so that
others may live.

# The dedication

by Xóchitl Arteaga Villamil

Sadness and grief are not emotions exclusive to humankind. The personnel
watching the exclusion Zone at Chernobyl did not expect to encounter a
mysterious companion, namely the offspring of dogs abandoned at the time
of evacuation, with whom they have woven a daily bond of care that
includes food, shelter, medicine and incineration at the time of death.
Without underestimating the effects that radiation may have on them,
coupled with the low quality of life of species that become feral after
domestication, the presence of the dogs invites us to imagine another
set of stories. The dogs are the living memory of those pets that were
not killed by a military shot, and they represent a group of non-human
refugees that link company and affection during the working days of the
guards.

# **The unquenchable fire**

by Fernanda Rodríguez González

Radioactive fire seems to be the final victory of Promethean fire.
Marder imagines it as that moment when nuclear energy has finally
realised the Western fantasies of an inextinguishable biblical fire, the
metaphysical dream of the immobile engine that moves everything, but
which, despite its character of creative and originating principles, has
also implied the annihilation of the created in its quest for the
affirmation of pure form. Thus, what was initially understood as a
definitive triumph was soon discovered to be an absolute defeat. Towards
the end of her piece, Julieta Aranda poses a question that leaves no
room for indifference: '\[w\]hen we reached maximum speed, slowness
became a luxury. Are we moving faster, or has the world shrunk?'
[@n78p9o6qway]. The question undoubtedly exposes a denunciation: the
gradual loss of the world that this technical-scientific paradigm has
brought with it. But there is still more to add. It is not only that
slowness has become a luxury (for a small privileged group that does not
have to deal with the speed of these processes, or for the corpses
produced by this same system), but it has also become a problem, as in
the case of radioactive waste. As a result, the construction of *deep
geological repositories* is the last attempt to find a place where we
can bury the waste produced by this radioactive fire, to remove it from
the surface and to offer us the hope of its complete oblivion (that it
will take charge of disappearing that which we have not managed to get
rid of, despite the fact that we are the ones who have produced it). But
what the hope for oblivion ignores is that, even if we pretend that
there is nothing there, that we pretend it never existed, oblivion can
never erase the marks and traces of what happened, but that it always
returns in one way or another to our present, because in reality it has
never ceased to be. When Plato wrote the *Allegory of the Cave*, he
never imagined that the day would come when the philosopher, the one who
left the cave in search of truth, would not only no longer wish to
return, but also would not be satisfied with his departure. His greatest
desire now is to lock up that inextinguishable fire, bury it in the
deepest bowels of the earth and seal the cavern in absolute oblivion.

# The dedication {#the-dedication}

by Gabriela Méndez Cota

This rewriting of *The Chernobyl Herbarium* is dedicated to all those
beings that have suffered as a result of the *catastrophe of thinking*
that links 'Chernobyl' to so many material and symbolic places far away
from Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. Within this, it is dedicated
especially to the cycads of Laguna Verde, Veracruz, to the devastated
rivers, volcanoes and crustaceans of Morelos and elsewhere in Mexico's
central valley, to the many languages that resist in Oaxaca and the
world, to the weeds lining the train tracks and development projects in
the Yucatan peninsula and the Amazon, to the mothers, friends and
relatives from Veracruz, and from all over Mexico and Latin America, who
keep searching for their disappeared while defending their territories
and their own human rights. However, this rewriting also seeks to
dislocate or open up the national, liberal humanist ways in which we
perceive and narrate the socioenvironmental devastation that is occuring
in Mexico. Marder writes that '\[i\]f the plants of Chernobyl are an
afterlife of radiation, then Tondeur's photograms are the afterlife of
that afterlife, a variation on the theme "the copy of a copy" that,
since Plato, has determined the outlines of the aesthetic domain'
[@marder_chernobyl_2016]. As an afterlife of *Voices of Chernobyl*, *The
Chernobyl Herbarium* would seem to re-enact the demise of an
onto-epistemology that includes liberal humanist authorship. Like
oil-based sovereignty, liberal humanist authorship appears to linger and
merge with the latest market discourse, as if its removal threatened to
shatter the more fundamental illusion of Knowledge that has always
sustained the borders of educational institutions and nation-states.
While it is great to have 'us', non-Anglo people, students, early career
researchers, queer, neuroatypical and differently-abled people
communicating from their specific locations, whatever those locations
may be and however they may be understood, it is also crucial that 'we'
do so in ways that are more than simply iterations of the globalised
bourgeois liberal humanism and its many assumptions regarding Knowledge
[@hall_stubborn_2021]. Janneke Adema writes that 'we need to enable a
form of knowledge, a critique that remains open to question but that can
at the same time be reconfigured, that can be cut and (temporally) fixed
at some points to establish meaning and signify knowing. It is a knowing
that, in this case goes beyond an internal subjectivity and includes the
external lifeworld' [@adema_living_2021]. She also references Samuel
Weber piracy of Kierkegaard's understanding of 'experimenting' as an
articulation of the singular, in order to further characterise what she
has in mind as the introduction of 'uncertainty, unpredictability, and
ambivalence into our modern conception of experimentation, one that
seems to go directly against the neoliberal rhetoric of planned
outcomes, risk analysis, and contingency plans, all of which are
designed to filter out the uncertain and the unpredictable'
[@adema_living_2021]. This is what allows for difference in repetition,
in repeating that we should all be communists, if only we can think a
little outside the frame of technical calculations and property
considerations. With Adema, we wish 'a scholarly poetics to be a form of
doing scholarship that pays specific attention to the relation between
context and content, ethics and aesthetics in our research; between the
methods and theories informing our scholarship and the media formats and
graphic spaces we communicate with' [@adema_living_2021]. Here, we
endeavoure to repeat repetition itself and thereby create something new;
something beyond self-referential modernist novelty or modernist
narcissistic disruption. In lieu of a critical analysis of Marder's
philosophy, or of a disruptive aesthetic intervention into 'his' or
'their' inscriptions, we offer our own meditations and witnessing; in
lieu of artistic photograms, we offer vernacular images grown in the
soil of Latin America's 'lost decade' as it is remembered in several
Mexican cities. Since the Chernobyl event is indeed unthinkable and
unrepresentable, what we insist on is the need to rewrite, reinterpret,
over-interpret, or disappropriate its countless afterlives. The
fragments we offer could be described as *the infinite afterlives of a
herbarium*. Such is our way of taking stock of the fragmentary event of
subjectivity, as the condition of possibility of another, more
environmentally attuned, way of living.

# References

'☢ Сhernobyl Tour ☢ Ukraine - Visit Pripyat, Chernobyl in 2020'. n.d.
Gamma Travel. Accessed 18 August 2021.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20220126112651/https://gamma-travel.com/tours>.

'About CHORNOBYL TOUR'. n.d. Chernobyl Tour. Accessed 18 August 2021.
<https://chernobyl-tour.com/about_us.html>.

Adema, Janneke. 2021. *Living Books: Experiments in the Posthumanities*.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Agamben, Giorgio. 2018. *Homo sacer. El poder soberano y la nuda vida*.
Adriana Hidalgo Editora.
<https://www.adrianahidalgo.com/libro/homo-sacer-giorgio-agamben/>.

Aguilar Gil, Yásnaya Elena. 2019a. 'Resistencia. Una Breve Radiografía'.
*Revista de La Universidad de México* 847 (April): 20--27.

Aguilar Gil, Yásnaya Elena. 2019b. Los pueblos indígenas no somos la
raíz de México, somos su negación constante. Interview by Pablo Ferri.
*El País*.
<https://elpais.com/cultura/2019/09/08/actualidad/1567970157_670834.html>.

Aguilar Gil, Yásnaya Elena. 2021. *Ää: Manifiestos sobre la diversidad
lingüística*. Almadía.
<https://almadiaeditorial.com/producto/aa-manifiestos-sobre-la-diversidad-linguistica/>.

Alexievich, Svetlana. 2019. *Voces de Chernóbil: Crónica del Futuro*.
Debolsillo.

Altamirano Miranda, Rosa Lizbet. 2018. 'De Chernóbil a Laguna Verde:
energía nucleoeléctrica y seguridad en México, 1972-1989'. Tesis de
maestría, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana.
<https://doi.org/10.24275/uami.r207tp382>.

Anspach, Carolyn Kiser. 1934. 'Medical Dissertation on Nostalgia by
Johannes Hofer, 1688'. *Bulletin of the Institute of the History of
Medicine* 2 (6): 376--91.

Aranda, Julieta. 2018. 'Rescatando mi propio cadáver (un conjunto
alterno de peldaños para el ascenso a la oscuridad)--Parte 3: Política
sin oxígeno'. Presented at the MUAC, virtual exhibition from 22 March
2021 to 20 June 2021.
<https://muac.unam.mx/exposicion/sala10-julieta-aranda>.

Balzaretti Camacho Lorena, Lorena Alejandra. 2014. '"El Oro No Vale Nada
En Las Entrañas de La Montaña" Caballo Blanco: Un Análisis Del Horizonte
de Coerción Empleado Por La Corporación Minera Goldgroup Mining Inc. En
La Región de Alto Lucero, Veracruz'. Tesis de maestría.
<http://repositorio.ciesas.edu.mx/handle/123456789/293>.

Baudrillard, Jean. 1997. *La ilusión del fin. La huelga de los
acontecimientos*. Translated by Thomas Kauf. Barcelona: Editorial
Anagrama.

Benjamin, Walter. 2012. 'La obra de arte en la época de su
reproductibilidad técnica'. In *Obra completa. Libro I/ vol. 2*, 370.
Madrid: Abada editores.
<https://abadaeditores.com/walter-benjamin/obra-completa-libro-i-vol-2-.html>.

Blakeslee, Sandra. 1984. 'Nuclear Spill At Juarez Looms As One Of
Worst'. *The New York Times*, 1 May 1984, sec. Science.
<https://www.nytimes.com/1984/05/01/science/nuclear-spill-at-juarez-looms-as-one-of-worst.html>.

Bolaños Ortiz, M. en C. Jacobo, María Teresa Figueroa Sánchez, and
Salinas Garcia Arcadia Irma. 2019. 'Informe Sobre El Impacto Negativo de
La Termoeléctrica En Huexca y La Región Oriente de Morelos'. Cuautla,
Morelos. <https://aguaparatodos.org.mx/wp-content/uploads/f8c40413.pdf>.

Borghesi, Massimo. 2007. *Secularización y nihilismo: cristianismo y
cultura contemporánea*. Colección Filosofía. Madrid: Ediciones
Encuentro, S.A.

Braunstein, Néstor A. 2012. *El inconsciente, la técnica y el discurso
capitalista*. México: Siglo XXI Editores.

Brooks, Darío. 2020. 'Cómo ocurrió el "Chernóbil mexicano", el mayor
incidente nuclear de la historia de América'. BBC News Mundo. 25 October
2020. <https://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-54429012>.

Canagarajah, A. Suresh. 2002. *A Geopolitics Of Academic Writing*.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
<https://upittpress.org/books/9780822957942/>.

Caputo, John D. 2010. 'Hermenéutica Espectral: Sobre La Debilidad de
Dios y La Teología Del Acontecimiento'. In *Después de La Muerte de
Dios. Conversaciones Sobre Religión, Política y Cultura*, edited by
Gianni Vattimo and John D. Caputo. Buenos Aires: Paidós.

Coccia, Emanuele. 2017. *La vida de las plantas: Una metafísica de la
mixtura*. Translated by Gabriela Milone. Buenos Aires: Miño y Dávila
editores.

Colebrook, Claire. 2019. 'Extinción feminista'. Translated by Fernanda
Rodríguez González. *Revista de Filosofía Universidad Iberoamericana* 51
(146): 70--93. <https://doi.org/10.48102/rdf.v51i146.6>.

De la Cruz Gallegos, Arístides de la Cruz. 2016. 'Gentrificación Del
Centro Histórico de La Ciudad de México'. In *Gentrificación. Zona
Metropolitana Del Valle de México*, edited by Alfonso Rodríguez López.
México: Plaza y Valdéz.

'Declaración de Guerra Del EZLN'. 2017. Archivosonoro. 1 January 2017.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210617183004/https://www.archivosonoro.org/archivos/declaracion-de-guerra-del-ezln/>.

Didi-Huberman, Georges. 2015. *Ante el tiempo*. Buenos Aires: Adriana
Hidalgo.
<https://www.adrianahidalgo.com/libro/ante-el-tiempo-georges-didi-huberman/>.

Enciso, Angélica. 2006. 'El Manantial de Cuautla, En Riesgo de
Contaminarse Por Instalación de Empresas - La Jornada'. La Jornada. 8
May 2006.
<https://www.jornada.com.mx/2006/05/08/index.php?section=sociedad&article=050n1soc>.

Esteva Cruz, Katya Gabriela. 2015. 'Acción colectiva, redes y actores en
la lucha contra el proyecto minero a cielo abierto Caballo Blanco'.
Tesis de maestría, Universidad Veracruzana. <https://cdigital.uv.mx/>.

García Bravo, María Haydeé. 2021. 'Hacer Leña Del Árbol Caído. También
En Pandemia, El Capital Demanda No Sólo La Bolsa, Sino La Vida'. In
*Atravesar La Pandemia. Ensayos a Cuatro Manos*, 67--77. CEIICH-UNAM.
<https://www.academia.edu/67830787/Hacer_le%C3%B1a_del_%C3%A1rbol_ca%C3%ADdo_Tambi%C3%A9n_en_pandemia_el_capital_demanda_no_s%C3%B3lo_la_bolsa_sino_la_vida>.

García-López, Rodrigo, Vicente Pérez-Brocal, and Andrés Moya. 2019.
'Beyond Cells -- The Virome in the Human Holobiont'. *Microbial Cell* 6
(9): 373--96. <https://doi.org/10.15698/mic2019.09.689>.

Gill, Rosalind. 2009. 'Breaking the Silence: The Hidden Injuries of the
Neoliberal University'. In *Secrecy and Silence in the Research
Process*, 228--43. London: Routledge.
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203927045>.

Godoy, Emilio. 2021. 'El exceso de basura radiactiva acecha a la central
nuclear de Laguna Verde'. *El País México*, 26 June 2021, sec. México.
<https://elpais.com/mexico/2021-06-26/el-exceso-de-basura-nuclear-acecha-a-la-central-de-laguna-verde.html>.

González Chévez, Lilián. 2020. *Proyecto Integral Morelos: Sus Impactos
Sociales y La Demanda de Justicia Hídrica de Los Ejidatarios Del
Municipio de Ayala, Morelos*. Primera edición. Caminos, Saberes,
Identidades 7. Cuernavaca, Morelos, México: Universidad Autónoma del
Estado de Morelos, Centro de Investigación en Ciencias Sociales y
Estudios Regionales.

González-Astorga, Jorge. sin fecha. 'Dioon edule en el Farallón'.
INECOL. sin fecha.
<https://www.inecol.mx/inecol/index.php/es/transparencia-inecol/17-%20ciencia-hoy/1213-dioon-edule-en-el-farallon>.

Gugelberger, Georg M., ed. 1996. *The Real Thing: Testimonial Discourse
and Latin America*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Guy, Jack. 2019. 'Chernobyl Control Room Now Open to Visitors \-- but
Only Wearing a Hazmat Suit'. CNN. 3 October 2019.
<https://www.cnn.com/travel/article/chernobyl-control-room-tours-scli-intl/index.html>.

Hall, Gary. 2021. *A Stubborn Fury. How Writing Works in Elitist
Britain*. London: Open Humanities Press.

Haraway, Donna J. 2016. *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the
Chthulucene*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
<https://www.dukeupress.edu/staying-with-the-trouble>.

Heidegger, Martin. 2007. *Los conceptos fundamentales de la metafísica:
Mundo, finitud, soledad*. Madrid: Alianza Editorial.
<https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/libro?codigo=292937>.

Illich, Ivan. 1970. 'The Dawn of Epimethean Man'. *Cuadernos Del CIDOC*
54: 1--16.

Illich, Ivan. 1972. *Deschooling Society*. Harper & Row.
<http://archive.org/details/DeschoolingSociety>.

Intervission staff. 2020. 'La Terrible Anécdota de Las Casas Radiactivas
En México'. *Intervission*, 2 December 2020.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210509080904/https://intervission.com/la-terrible-anecdota-de-las-casas-radiactivas-en-mexico/>.

Jett, Jennifer, and Ben Dooley. 2021. 'Fukushima Wastewater Will Be
Released Into the Ocean, Japan Says'. *The New York Times*, 12 April
2021, sec. World.
<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/13/world/asia/japan-fukushima-wastewater-ocean.html>.

*La Jornada San Luis*. 2020. 'Renuevan en Chile estado de excepción por
pandemia de Covid-19', 11 September 2020.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210119022335/https://lajornadasanluis.com.mx/internacional/renuevan-en-chile-estado-de-excepcion-por-pandemia-de-covid-19/>.

Lacan, Jacques. 2007. *The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: The Other Side of
Psychoanalysis*. Translated by Russell Grigg. Vol. Book XVII. London: W.
W. Norton & Co.

Liboiron, Max. 2016. 'Redefining Pollution and Action: The Matter of
Plastics'. *Journal of Material Culture* 21 (1): 87--110.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1359183515622966>.

López, Eugenia. 2018. 'Lorena Cabnal: Sanar y defender el
territorio-cuerpo-tierra'. Avispa Midia. 26 June 2018.
<https://avispa.org/lorena-cabnal-sanar-y-defender-el-territorio-cuerpo-tierra/>.

Marder, Michael. 2013. *Plant-Thinking: A Philosophy of Vegetal Life*.
Columbia University Press.

Marder, Michael, and Anaïs Tondeur. 2016. *The Chernobyl Herbarium:
Fragments of an Exploded Consciousness*. London: Open Humanities Press.
<http://www.openhumanitiespress.org/books/titles/the-chernobyl-herbarium/>.

Martínez Luna, Jaime. 2017. 'Comunalidad... Camino Que Se Hace\... al
Andar'. México: UNAM, Instituto de Investigaciones Sociales.

Martínez, Mario Arturo. 2021a. 'Ambientalistas de Oaxaca protestan de
nuevo contra tala de árboles por obra: "no estamos contra el
desarrollo'. *El Universal Oaxaca*, 28 July 2021.
<https://oaxaca.eluniversal.com.mx/metropoli/ambientalistas-de-oaxaca-protestan-de-nuevo-contra-tala-de-arboles-por-obra-no-estamos>.

Martínez, Mario Arturo. 2021b. 'Ambientalistas llegan a acuerdo con el
gobierno de Oaxaca para que avance obra de Símbolos Patrios'. *El
Universal Oaxaca*, 1 November 2021.
<https://oaxaca.eluniversal.com.mx/metropoli/ambientalistas-llegan-acuerdo-con-el-gobierno-de-oaxaca-para-que-avance-obra-de-simbolos>.

Meillassoux, Quentin. 2015. *Después de la finitud. Ensayo sobre la
necesidad de la contingencia*. Buenos Aires: Caja Negra.
<https://cajanegraeditora.com.ar/libros/despues-de-la-finitud/>.

Mejía Reyes, Lisbeth. 2021. '2021, El Año Más Crítico Por Escasez de
Agua'. *El Imparcial de Oaxaca*, 11 May 2021.
<https://imparcialoaxaca.mx/la-capital/530262/2021-el-ano-mas-critico-por-escasez-de-agua/>.

Moore, Jason W. 2020. *La trama de la vida en los umbrales del
Capitaloceno: El pensamiento de Jason W. Moore*. BAJO TIERRA.
<https://traficantes.net/libros/la-trama-de-la-vida-en-los-umbrales-del-capitaloceno>.

Moreiras, Alberto. 2001. *The Exhaustion of Difference: The Politics of
Latin American Cultural Studies*. Post-Contemporary Interventions.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Moreiras, Alberto. 2020. *Against Abstraction: Notes from an Ex-Latin
Americanist*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
<https://doi.org/10.7560/319826>.

Nancy, Jean-Luc. 1991. 'Literary Communism'. In *The Inoperative
Community*, translated by Peter Connor, First edition. Theory and
History of Literature 76. Minneapolis, MN: University Of Minnesota
Press.

Nava Morales, Elena. 2020. 'Ecos de la Comunalidad en Oaxaca a inicios
del siglo xxi'. *IdeAs. Idées d'Amériques*, no. 16 (October).
<https://doi.org/10.4000/ideas.9121>.

Nepomuceno, Eric. 1987. 'El brillo azul de la muerte'. *El País*, 31
October 1987, sec. Internacional.
<https://elpais.com/diario/1987/11/01/internacional/562719615_850215.html>.

Pappon, Thomas. 2018. 'El mayor accidente radioactivo ocurrido fuera de
una instalación nuclear del que pocos han oído hablar'. *BBC News
Mundo*, 7 October 2018. <https://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-45740760>.

Paya, Víctor. 2018. 'Laguna Verde: La Violencia de La Modernización:
Actores y Movimiento Social'. Tesis de maestría.
<http://mora.repositorioinstitucional.mx/jspui/handle/1018/305>.

Primavesi, Anne. 1995. *Del Apocalipsis al Génesis: ecología, feminismo,
cristianismo*. Barcelona: Herder.

Rivera Garza, Cristina. 2019. *Los muertos indóciles: Necroescrituras y
desapropiación*. Ciudad de México: Debolsillo.

Ruhl, Sarah. 2008. *Eurydice*. New York: Samuel French.

Ruíz, Emmanuel. 2022. 'En La Heroica, Universidad Del Viverismo Podría
Ser Una Realidad'. *El Sol de Cuautla*, 8 May 2022, sec. Noticias
Locales, Policiacas, sobre México, Morelos y el Mundo.
<https://www.elsoldecuautla.com.mx/local/en-la-heroica-universidad-del-viverismo-podria-ser-una-realidad-8252721.html>.

Salas Mar, Bernardo. 2015. 'Determination of 137Cs and 60Co Pollution in
the Area of the Laguna Verde Nuclear Power Plant, Mexico'. *Radiation
Protection Dosimetry* 167 (1--3): 228--30.
<https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncv250>.

Sánchez, Mabel Yescas. 2018. 'La turistificación en el Centro Histórico
de Oaxaca'. *Estudios críticos de desarrollo* VII (14): 75--111.

Smith, Melanie, dir. 2014. *Fordlandia*. HD -- color -- quadraphonic
(4.0). México/Brasil. <https://felixblume.com/fordlandia/>.

Smith, Melanie, and José Luis Barrios. 2014. *Fordlandia. Melanie Smith.
Potencia y noche salva*. Barcelona: RM.

Torres, Humberto A. 2018. 'Es Oaxaca El Estado Con Mayor Superficie
Deforestada'. *El Imparcial de Oaxaca*, 17 November 2018.
[https://imparcialoaxaca.mx/oaxaca/245925/es-oaxaca-el-estado-con-mayor-superficie-deforestada/#:\~:text=Oaxaca%20tiene%20una%20superficie%2](https://imparcialoaxaca.mx/oaxaca/245925/es-oaxaca-el-estado-con-mayor-superficie-deforestada/#:~:text=Oaxaca%20tiene%20una%20superficie%2 "null").

Tovar de Teresa, Guillermo. 2006. *La Ciudad: Un Palimpsesto*. Ciudad de
México: Educal.

Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. 2021. *The Mushroom at the End of the World: On
the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins*. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
<https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691220550/the-mushroom-at-the-end-of-the-world>.

Van Dooren, Thom. 2014. *Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of
Extinction*. Columbia University Press.

'Viejas Tuberías Hacen de México Uno de Los Países Con Mayor Desperdicio
de Agua: OCDE'. 2021. Consejo Consultivo Del Agua, A. C. 9 May 2021.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20210509195359/https://www.aguas.org.mx/sitio/blog/noticias/item/1683-viejas-tuberias-hacen-de-mexico-uno-de-los-paises-con-mayor-desperdicio-de-agua-ocde.html>.

Vovides, Andrew. 1987. 'Dioon Edule: La Planta Mas Antigua de Mexico'.
*Ciencia y Desarrollo* 73 (3): 19--24.

Waldheim, Gottfried von. 1950. 'La ideología política de Goethe'.
*Revista de estudios políticos*, no. 53: 130--41.

Williams, Gareth. 2021. *Infrapolitical Passages: Global Turmoil,
Narco-Accumulation, and the Post-Sovereign State*. 1st ed. Fordham
University Press. <https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv1199059>.

Zambrano, María. 2007. *Islas*. Madrid: Editorial Verbum.

Zambrano, María. 2020. *El hombre y lo divino*. Madrid: Editorial
Alianza.

Zamudio, Omar, dir. 2021. *La Nopalera*.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pf_3nuFxRak>.

Zaragocin, Sofia. 2018. 'Espacios Acuáticos Desde Una Descolonialidad
Hemisférica Feminista'. *Mulier Sapiens*, no. 10.

Zavala, Juan Carlos. 2021. 'Mediante amparo, piden garantizar vida de
Markoa, pintor que lleva 39 días de huelga de hambre en Oaxaca'. *El
Universal Oaxaca*, 29 November 2021.
<https://oaxaca.eluniversal.com.mx/sociedad/mediante-amparo-piden-garantizar-vida-de-markoa-pintor-que-lleva-39-dias-de-huelga-de>.

[^1]: In México, for example, the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE),
    owner of the Laguna Verde nuclear power plant, is facing a serious
    problem: an excess of radioactive waste that is beginning to
    saturate the capacity of some of its repositories, while others have
    in fact already been exceeded. Nevertheless, the Laguna Verde plant
    has managed to renew its license to continue operating for another
    thirty years (Godoy, 2021).

[^2]: I take the categories of Bios and Zoe from the philosophical
    proposal of Giorgio Agamben, in particular Agamben, 2018.
